Klaviyo

Klaviyo is a developer of an email and SMS marketing platform designed to pull in data to improve business operations. The company's platform accesses, stores, analyzes, and uses transactional and behavioral data for the company's targeted email and advertising campaigns.

Klaviyo offers users the choice of methods to market, including personalized newsletters, automated emails, order follow-ups, and personalized thank you's.
Platform
Klaviyo's platform offers users marketing automation through digital channels. The platform is designed for e-commerce merchants.
Integrations
Klaviyo works by integrating into a user's existing platform or offering users an API to integrate into their system, and connecting existing customer data with Klaviyo's software, which works to make the data actionable through their marketing campaigns. These integrations include:
Shopify
Magento
BigCommerce
SalesForce Commerce Cloud
WooCommerce
ReCharge
YotPo.
Aftership
Privy
Facebook
Segmentation
Through Klaviyo's platform, users are able to segment the customers they wish to market to based on behavior, properties, or previous engagement. This data is generated through Klaviyo's integrations and their native customer tracking. The tracking also offers users the chance to market towards customers who have viewed a product multiple times without purchasing.
Personalization
Through the data ingestion which drives Klaviyo's segmentation abilities, the company's platform also offers personalization options which can include order details, cart contents, product recommendations and custom web feeds.

Here is a list of platforms that Klaviyo integrates with and information on what they do:

Klevu is an AI Search and Discovery Platform for ecommerce that leverages machine learning and user behavior analytics to elevate the search experience, and automatically re-merchandise category listing pages and product recommendations. Klevu’s machine learning abilities develop an ongoing understanding of how shoppers are engaging with a website specifically, improving with every click, purchase, and product review. Klevu drives 37% more revenue per web session for retailers that use at least two products in the Product Discovery Platform, which includes Smart Search, Smart Recommendations, and Smart Category Merchandising. The Klevu Product Discovery Platform includes: Search Engine Solution Not your average ecommerce site search Not priced for your average ecommerce website, but we don’t power average websites. Harness the power of real-time user intent and improve your customer’s shopping experience. Combine linguistics and deep machine learning to deliver more enticing search results. Category Merchandising Tool Merchandise your ecommerce categories better Klevu combines AI magic and powerful merchandising tools to power better-than-average category pages. Whether or not you have time to be meticulous, Klevu AI can help squeeze 37% more revenue from every web visit. Product Recommendation System Inspire shoppers to spend more on what they like Average product recommendations take up space. Inspire shoppers with Klevu AI product carousels. Combine AI magic with precision control and squeeze 37% more revenue from every web visit. What makes Klevu unique? * Klevu AI - The AI underpins the Klevu Discovery Platform providing semantic query processing, product catalog enrichment on import real-time user behavior analytics based on shopper searches, product clicks, checkouts, product ratings, and the sentiment within product reviews. * Ease-of-use - With Klevu, making it easy for people to reach their goals is at the core of Klevu - whether that is an easy-to-use admin panel for setting up ecommerce strategies, simple and fast integration, or having full-coverage APIs and SDKs to build product discovery experiences easily from scratch. * Visual Discovery - Powered by Klevu’s intelligent and proprietary AI and image processing technology, Visual Search and Visually Similar product recommendations are available out-of-the-box and require a simple image sync.

Gorgias enables thousands of merchants to manage all their customer service channels in a unified platform integrated with Shopify, BigCommerce, and Magento. Perform powerful Shopify actions (like issuing refunds or editing orders) directly in the helpdesk, and leverage automation to answer repetitive questions with personalized answers. The result is better and faster support for your customers, an efficient workflow for your agents, and more sales for your store.

Triple Whale is the central source of truth for your ecommerce store. With Triple Whale, you can view real-time marketing performance data through a customizable dashboard or mobile app, integrate all of your core channels (paid social, email, SMS, + more), and gain clarity into every customer purchase. Best in class data attribution + data visualization = confident scaling for better ROAS.

Friendbuy is a SaaS platform powering referral and loyalty programs for the world’s most recognizable ecommerce companies. Our clients include disruptors such as Casper, Outdoor Voices, FIGS, AWAY and Princess Polly, as well as global Fortune 100s such as Walmart, Intuit, Disney and Nestle. Friendbuy is a technology-first company, enabling brands to scale efficiently and deepen customer loyalty. Our mission is to empower growth marketers through innovation.
1o\nMaking eCommerce enjoyable for all 1o Tag-Level e-commerce enables partnerships that give content creators, brands, and consumers more of what they want: better sales, better performance, and the best purchase experience on the internet.

29 Next is an all-in-one ecommerce platform with unique features built for fast-growing DTC brands and direct response marketers. Create branded customer experiences through fully customizable landing pages, upsells, checkouts, and more, while keeping your sales and customer data safe and secure in one place. With scalability, unmatched customer experiences, localization tools, and a full-fledged CRM, 29 Next is the perfect upgrade for DTC brands who have been wanting more out of their platform.

Founded in 1997, 3dcart is a complete and robust eCommerce platform designed to help online store owners thrive in a competitive market. With hundreds of features built directly into its software, business owners can effectively open, operate and maintain a successful online store with relative ease and efficiency.

8returns is an easy returns management platform that helps online merchants save money and time by offering an automated system for refunds, exchanges, and product repairs while offering a first-class customer experience. 8returns and Klaviyo: The 8returns and Klaviyo integration allows merchants to trigger flows based on returns-related events, use Klaviyo templates for transactional notifications and centralize email data about customers. Use cases: * Use Klaviyo templates to notify customers about their returns: Instead of sending emails via 8returns, shoot them from your Klaviyo account and add your standard templates. * Trigger automated email flow based on return events + return types, return reasons, or specific items: Suggest new or similar products, thank customers for exchanging or repairing items, offer vouchers in case of damaged items, or ask for feedback about the product and how to display it better on your website.

ActBlue’s Flexible & free fundraising tools to harness the power of the grassroots.
Adobe Commerce (Magento)\nMagento empowers thousands of retailers and brands with the best e-commerce platforms and flexible cloud solutions to rapidly innovate and grow.
AfterShip is an automated tracking solution and API for eCommerce. Support tracking of 900+ international couriers like UPS, USPS, FedEx, DHL, China Post, Aramex, Australia Post, and more.

Alaiko provides seamless fulfillment for successful e-commerce brands and enables scalable growth with digital processes and automation. Alaiko's network with virtually limitless growth potential and cutting-edge warehousing, helps e-commerce businesses scale efficiently and seamlessly. The Alaiko Operating System® enables transparent and automated processes in warehousing & logistics. This allows the online store to remain in full control of the fulfillment process. Alaiko focuses on the fastest delivery and customer experience: Customers are proactively informed about the status of their orders throughout the shipping process and can manage them independently – from delivery to return. With Alaiko, online retailers maximize their fulfillment performance and provide a first-class experience for their customers. Your logistics will never be a bottleneck again!

Ali Reviews is an optimal product review app that allows you to build the reputation and conversion of your store by using the power of customer reviews. Receiving a rating of 4.9 from more than 7,300 reviews makes Ali Reviews one of the most trusted apps today. No matter what type of store you run, Ali Reviews has plenty of handy features to help you quickly collect and enhance your reviews' visibility.

Alloy Automation is the integration & automation platform for ecommerce. Connect data & actions across 180+ ecommerce platform, ERP, marketing, & fulfillment apps. Brands use Alloy to connect and empower their tech stack. SaaS companies use Alloy to add dozens of integrations to their platform automatically. At the end of the day, Alloy reduces the unnecessary integration work that is repeated throughout the ecommerce ecosystem.

Amped.io is a no-code popup builder with ready-to-go templates for Email + SMS popups, bars, announcements, quizzes, and surveys. With Amped, you can create popups in a builder that works more like Figma or Webflow. Start with a proven template and customize to your brand in minutes OR create anything your designer can dream up. If you're looking to maximize Klaviyo's power, growing your list faster will be one of the quickest and impactful areas to focus. The team behind Amped.io in Raleigh, NC is eager to give advice and support and also has options available if you want the whole thing done-for-you.

Annex Cloud combines best-in-class loyalty management with powerful engagement and communication modules to build customer relationships and profits at scale. Our Loyalty Experience Platform™ is purpose-built on a mutual value exchange to make every customer interaction timely, relevant, and unique. Pushing loyalty data across your email and marketing platform—and entire tech stack—is a game-changer that elevates your entire digital marketing strategy. Keep customers coming back, incent profitable behaviors, and drive growth. The 125-plus pre-built integrations make it easy and fast to implement. Innovative engagement modules build emotional bonds, reduce churn, and build true brand-to-human connections that accelerate growth. · Global clients include ACTION, Toyota, NuSkin, Phillip Morris · Global team of 200+ employees, offices in Dallas, TX, Germany, and India · Earned highest possible scores in 15 criteria in The Forrester Wave™: Loyalty Solutions, Q2 2021 Report.
Antavo Loyalty Management Platform – API-Centric, Enterprise-Grade Loyalty Programs Antavo is an enterprise-grade SaaS loyalty technology provider that builds comprehensive loyalty programs to foster brand love and change customer behavior for brands, retailers, and shopping malls. With a scalable and holistic loyalty logic, Antavo supercharges the marketing strategy of omnichannel and e-commerce companies, and delivers a next-level shopping experience with best-in-class in-store capabilities. - Global clients include Lagardere, Toys”R”Us, PepsiCo, AB InBev, Jimmy Jazz, the N Brown Group, the Benetton Group, and LuisaViaRoma – contributing 16% growth in revenue for the latter. - Antavo has an international team of 50, with offices across the globe. - A forward-thinking company disrupting the loyalty industry, 60% of company revenue is reinvested in R&D of loyalty technology.

AnyRoad empowers leading consumer brands with the technology and insights they need to deliver world-class live experiences and events.

At Aphix, we have developed a suite of eCommerce and mobile apps providing integration to ERP systems and online digital marketplaces from one secure platform. The main features include real-time ERP integration, digital catalogue management, promotions management, order management, customer self-service, multi-store management, shopping cart functionality and much more. Other features include social selling, industry-standard security, content management system, search engine optimization (SEO) capability and analytics. Aphix supports integration with other eCommerce platforms and enables vendors to sell their products on global marketplaces. Additionally, Aphix offers functionalities for your customers that includes real-time stock information, customer-specific pricing, order history, my account functionality and support for multiple payment gateways.

Appstle℠ Subscriptions, IS A COMPREHENSIVE & 5-STAR RATED SUBSCRIPTIONS APP that enables you to offer products and services to your customers, on a recurring basis. Appstle℠ Subscriptions offers both CONVENTIONAL SUBSCRIPTIONS as well as BUILD-A-BOX! NOTE: We do NOT charge any transaction fees on recurring orders. The ‘no transaction fee’ rule applies to all pricing plans, including the free tier! Key Features: * Mixed cart checkout * Product quick-view and cart page subscription widget * Widget display modes (dropdown, radio button, ...) * Self-managed subscription * Tiered discounts & loyalty * One-time product inclusion * Seamless Shopify checkout connect * Auto billing for subscription products - regular and pre-paid/bulk billing * Personalized email notifications * Custom shipping * Inventory forecasting * Dunning management to reduce churn * Cancellation management to know your customers' pulse * Real-time performance tracker * Activity logs & timelines * Custom CSS and subscription widget option AND 24x7x365 PRODUCT SUPPORT

Arka is a custom packaging solutions company that enables its customers to source packaging or fulfillment online. It offers packaging services which are customized to its clients’ needs and include proofing and production paperwork. The company operates and maintains a network of worldwide package manufacturers and fulfillment centers, and communicates with them on behalf of their customers. Its client portfolio includes e-commerce and D2C businesses locally and internationally.

Aspire is the leading influencer marketing platform empowering e-commerce brands to build and cultivate influential communities of influencers, ambassadors, affiliates, customers, and more. Brands using Aspire can discover authentic partners, streamline relationships, scale their programs, and measure true business impact — regardless of where they are in their influencer marketing journey. From influencer search and Creator Marketplace to fully customizable relationship workflows, Aspire is the only platform that enables brands to build a unique influencer program.

AtData is a data-driven technology company whose fast, easy and secure email tools help global marketers verify, enrich and connect customer emails instantly when they need it most. Our goal is to help our customers take control of their first party email data collection, accelerate their marketing performance, minimize the cost of fraud and drive their data-oriented business strategies.

Automizely Marketing is a free app with the potential to replace 30+ paid apps. Leverage its easy-to-use interface to set up email marketing campaigns, exit popups, cart recoveries and 30+ different marketing tools in just a matter of a few minutes. It works seamlessly with Shopify, Shopify Plus and WooCommerce platforms. In a nutshell, Automizely Marketing has everything you need to boost your sales on Shopify store many folds.

Avis Vérifiés by Skeepers, Nous vous proposons une solution all-in-one rapide et simple à mettre en place. 2 - Avis Vérifiés by Skeepers recueille trois types d'avis différents post-achat : - les avis site pour évaluer votre boutique en ligne - les avis produit pour booster vos fiches produit - les avis établissement pour évaluer votre boutique, restaurant, agence, garage etc. 3 - Affichez des étoiles dans vos campagnes Adwords et Shopping grâce à notre partenariat avec Google. 4 - Tous nos processus sont encadrés par la norme NF Service \Avis Clients\" afin de donner à vos retours clients transparence et fiabilité. Nos sollicitations se font en post-achat sur 100% des acheteurs. 5 - En transformant l’avis client en KPI clé

Back In Stock by Appikon Now bring back customers to your store with automated back-in-stock alerts! Most of the online shoppers don’t make a purchase on their first visit. Let shoppers subscribe to upcoming products & out of stock products via email, SMS, Facebook Messenger & web push notifications. >> The best app to send automated back in stock alerts - Back in stock email alerts - Automated SMS alerts - Facebook Messenger notifications - Web push notifications - Smart automation - Segmented restock alerts (based on product variants) - Multi-location support - Works with every theme - Supports multiple languages >> Advanced features for back in stock notifications Let customer subscribe to & receive restock alerts for specific variant combinations like size, colour or style. Capture purchase intent, personalize in-stock notifications & increase conversions. >> Multiple location support If you have inventory in multiple locations, send restock alerts only when the product is back in stock in the location a customer subscribed from. Take complete control over which warehouse locations are connected to the app & improve inventory management. >> Product pre-orders & powerful market research \Coming Soon\" feature helps you understand your market & create buzz around product launches. Perfect to capture pre-orders & create waitlists. Gauge market demand for products before you restock or launch a new collection.”

BeProfit is the most accurate profit calculator and analytics dashboard for eCommerce sellers. Chosen as a Shopify Staff Pick, the app provides sellers with an accurate picture of their bottom line and a 360° view on their business performance. The app simplifies complex data and turns it into friendly charts and graphs that make profit tracking as intuitive as it gets. The app features custom reports, marketing performance & Product insights, LTV cohort analysis, and everything else sellers need in order to make better decisions backed by data and optimize their profitability.
BigCommerce\nBigCommerce (Nasdaq: BIGC) is a leading software-as-a-service (SaaS) ecommerce platform that empowers merchants of all sizes to build, innovate and grow their businesses online. As a leading Open SaaS solution, BigCommerce provides merchants sophisticated enterprise-grade functionality, customization and performance with simplicity and ease-of-use. Tens of thousands of B2B and B2C companies across 150 countries and numerous industries use BigCommerce to create beautiful, engaging online stores, including Ben & Jerry’s, Molton Brown, S.C. Johnson, Skullcandy, Sony and Vodafone. Headquartered in Austin, BigCommerce has offices in San Francisco, Sydney and London.

Bold Commerce is in the business of making checkout better, helping brands convert more shoppers in more places. Bold’s Checkout Experience Suite is the only high-converting, customizable headless checkout with built in subscriptions and pricing capabilities, for a checkout without limits. Leading omnichannel retailers like Vera Bradley, Harry Rosen, and Staples Canada, and emerging DTC brands, trust Bold to overcome legacy platform limitations, improve checkout conversion and deliver anywhere commerce.

Brevi Chat - Turn more store visitors into customers with Brevi Chat - the powerful, free live chat app for small and growing Shopify businesses that works effortlessly out of the box. Customers prefer chat over any other way to contact you. Brevi Chat will make you look good in front of them. With Brevi Chat you can: * Chat, live or later - personalized automated messaging handles customer questions, gathers info anytime you’re unavailable. * Use automated, targeted chats to boost sales by messaging active and return shoppers. * Engage with your shoppers instantly from any device. Answer questions, give product advice from anywhere. * Get SMS Text and Email Notifications to know when a store visitor sends a message. * Provide automatic responses on order status, shipping and returns. * Watch your shoppers live - where they’re from, what they’re viewing and what they’re buying.

Brightpearl is the number one digital operations platform (DOP) for the retail and wholesale sector. Brightpearl automates back end operations, from sales and inventory management to CRM and logistics, so that merchants can focus on growing their business. Now over 1,400 companies use our platform to process more than $3 billion in orders and benefit from high-performing connectors to the major ecommerce platforms, including Shopify, Magento and BigCommerce.

Brij is a no-code platform that helps brands create ROI optimized, QR-code digital experiences for seamless 1st party data capture, product reorder & subscription opt-in, allowing brands to collect valuable customer data regardless of the channels they sell through. With Brij’s Shopify app and robust dashboard, brands can create dynamic experiences in minutes and track rich engagement data down to the SKU or even unit level that provides valuable insights for their brand
CartHook Offer your customers irresistible, one-click upsells immediately after they complete their purchase. Leading Shopify brands use CartHook’s post-purchase upsells to increase their AOV, improve customer loyalty, and build brand equity. Shopify merchants have processed more than $1 billion with CartHook.

Catch turns your checkout into a retention tool, not a cost center. With Catch, brands can process payments for 30¢ per transaction (instead of the 2-3% + 30¢ everyone else charges) via direct bank transfer. Brands then pass those savings on to customers as store credit, incentivizing them to shop again. Customers save. You build loyalty. Everyone wins – except the credit card companies.

The headless commerce platform for fashion and lifestyle brands. Most ecommerce platforms are built for multi‑brand retailers. They’re costly to develop and don’t support fashion & lifestyle business logic. With Centra, your fashion or lifestyle brand can stay ahead and focus on growing their fan base and expanding globally, instead of on maintaining complex technology.

Certainly is a Conversational AI Platform made for ecommerce. We help DTC brands that need a scalable solution to increase online sales and automate customer support. With Certainly you can: * Integrate with your eCommerce tech stack * Collect zero-party data via conversations * Create interactive website experiences * Offer personalized product recommendations * Offer smart up/cross-selling for each user * Support users through check-out Expected Results: * Increase in website conversions * Increase in average order value * 50%+ tickets solved without human touch

Cevoid is the easiest way to collect and showcase UGC from your brand's community. Collect all UGC content in one place. Add it to your website and emails within minutes. Free trial available for all brands! Cevoid integrates with the major e-commerce platforms and a seamless Shopify app. Brands using other e-commerce platforms or headless solutions can easily integrate with Google Shopping feeds. Collect UGC * Track and request UGC posts from Instagram * Whitelist influencers * Invite customers and influencers to upload content directly to your brand * Upload in-house content and attribute it to a creator Add product tags and Labels * Tag products to show what products are displayed * Add hotspots to show where in the UGC post a product is located * Add labels to your UGC posts Showcase UGC * Create UGC widgets for Klaviyo emails * Build UGC galleries to showcase UGC on your store * Turn any UGC post into a shoppable card for blog posts * Create a dynamic UGC gallery for your product pages * Add UGC to your DPA feeds

Chargebee is a revenue operations platform used by SaaS businesses worldwide to automate their billing and manage their subscription workflows. Chargebee helps businesses streamline their entire subscription workflow - from managing trials, modeling pricing plans, and delivering personal checkout experiences - to actually collecting those payments, automating recovery when payments fail, recognizing revenue for finance teams, and understanding business growth metrics.

Classy fundraising software gives you the power to raise more money online. Create beautifully branded fundraising pages in minutes.
Clyde Offer product protection, drive revenue. Clyde gives you the opportunity to offer an exceptional customer experience and peace of mind when customers need you most—when something goes wrong. And what's more, Clyde gives you the opportunity to increase average order value and revenue every time you sell a product. Clyde's clear, customizable calls-to-action make purchasing product protection a breeze. We make contract information and filing claims simple, transparent, and intuitive, and we manage the entire claims process end-to-end, so your customers can use their plans when they need them.

Cohley is changing the way that the world’s best brands generate & test content by connecting them with an expansive network of talented photographers, content creators, videographers and partners. As today’s marketers are being asked to do more with less, Cohley is striving to provide an unfair advantage to brands who understand that data-driven content will always outperform assumption.


Commerce The modern DTC platform for wineries We help wineries grow their direct-to-consumer sales and create great consumer shopping experiences. We do that, by offering the industry’s most modern and customer centric club management, ecommerce, POS, reservation, and CRM tools.

Conjured Referrals by Shop Circle Let’s ignite sales through one of the most effective marketing channels. Conjured referrals allows you to launch a Refer-A-Friend program quickly and easily. Reward your fans in ways they appreciate and activate the power of word-of-mouth marketing to boost sales. Key Features: * Automated Campaigns. Discount codes or Gift Cards are created automatically, so there's no need for manual entry. * Customize every detail! Your brand is unique, so why settle for a cookie-cutter referral program? * Prevent fraud and self-referrals through several powerful and sophisticated settings. * Explore Analytics for Success. Review a wide array of statistics, check on the progress of your campaign, and optimize for success. * Works with any currency and can be fully translated into any language

Convert Plus Generate more subscribers & sales conversions using popups, header & footer bars, slide-in forms, sidebar widgets, in-line forms, social buttons — all in one plugin!
Convert Pro\nConvert Pro is a WordPress lead generation plugin with an easy-to-use drag & drop editor to create high-converting opt-in forms. It helps you generate leads, build email lists, promote offers, offer downloadables, display videos, etc. with call-to-actions like modal popups, infobars, slide-in popups, inline forms, etc. Convert Pro comes with ready-to-use templates and gives you 100% design freedom. You can create a single popup with multiple steps depending on the campaign needs. With advanced triggers and targeting options, you can use Convert Pro to display targeted call-to-actions to the right audience at the right time and in the right place. Here are some quick features of Convert Pro Easy design options These allow you to build different call-to-actions that match the look and feel of your website and serve the purpose of the campaign. Advanced user targeting options These help you track users coming from different devices, websites, etc. Advanced call-to-action triggers These will help you display call-to-actions at the right time depending on the user's interaction with your website. They include exit intent, well-timed trigger, user inactivity trigger, after-scroll, etc. Rulesets with triggers Convert Pro lets you combine two or more triggers for advanced user targeting. Deeper integration Convert Pro is a lead capture tool that helps you design call-to-actions and display them in the right way to capture lead data. You can integrate it with email marketing service providers and CRM’s like Klaviyo that will help you store and manage these leads. Performance tracking Convert Pro integrates well with Google Analytics and helps you track the performance of call-to-actions on your website. A/B Testing to pick the best The integration of Convert Pro with Google Analytics also lets you A/B test multiple call-to-actions to test and understand what’s working best with your audience.

ConvertFlow is the all-in-one funnel builder for ecommerce. Build your store's popups, quizzes, product recommendations, and landing page funnels, without waiting on developers. Before ConvertFlow: Your conversion funnel is a chaotic mess of apps, plugins, scripts & zaps. Reporting is confusing. Making changes takes weeks waiting for developers. Growing revenue means paying for more traffic. After ConvertFlow: All of your store’s conversion campaigns are organized in one dashboard. Reporting is clear. Running funnel experiments is easy. Making changes takes minutes with the funnel builder. You increase ROAS and maximize revenue per website visitor.

CountdownMail is an innovative tool that helps you embed countdown timers in your emails so that one can increase urgency, boost engagement and encourage sales. Powerful & easy to use timer builder allows you to create the most complete, and at the same time easy to use countdown timer builder.

Creator is the industry leader in driving digital experience transformation. We empower brands to transform static and conventional digital content into inspiring end-to-end brand experiences that drive revenue, captivate visitors, expand customer loyalty, and stand out among competitors. Creator allows marketers to break free from templates, eliminate development dependencies, and avoid tech stack paralysis, all at a fraction of the time and cost of the status quo. Marketers never again have to compromise creative vision due to outdated functionality or resource limitations. Backed by an intuitive, best-in-class platform, and a team of creativity innovators in design, Creator brings digital experiences to life through limitless interactive possibilities.

Crossing Minds is the #1 personalization engine for omnichannel marketing teams using email & SMS. The Crossing Minds platform powers perceptive recommendations that drive discovery and engagement. Founded and led by world-renowned AI pioneers and powered by the latest advances in deep learning, Crossing Minds instantly delivers precise, session-based recommendations that don’t infringe on or jeopardize customer privacy. We help businesses engage their customers. We help people discover products they love. We help turn curiosity into loyalty.

Custimy.io is the most accessible all-in-one Customer Data Platform software for small and medium-sized companies. With Custimy.io Expro 1.0 E-commerce businesses now has one of the first \No-code\" Customer Data Platforms that automatically collect

Daasity enables DTC brands to make better data-driven decisions, leading to faster and more profitable growth. Daasity centralizes a brand’s data into a working data model to easily analyze and push their data to their key marketing channels to get more from their data. Gain a holistic view of your customer activities, and better target your customers with more data. Daasity + Klaviyo combines triggers from all your apps, tools, and data sources so that you can create more robust, insightful segments and flows. Unlock powerful insights and create more meaningful customer relationships with Daasity and Klayvio. Find out why more than 1,600+ brands choose Daasity to do more with their data. Visit www.Daasity.com or send a note to sales@daasity.com.
Databox\nDatabox is a decision-making platform built to help you track performance, discover insights and understand what's going on with your business. It connects your cloud services, spreadsheets, databases and custom integrations to organize all of your business KPIs in one place. Databox will deliver your metrics via mobile, browser, big screen, Apple Watch® and even Slack.

Dataddo to extract your data from Klaviyo or any cloud-based service and send it to any destination, whether it’s a dashboarding app, data warehouse, or CRM tool. Automate the entire time-consuming extraction process with Dataddo and spend more time using your data, not managing it. Our platform is designed with the non-technical business user in mind, meaning that anyone can set up a data flow within minutes of creating an account.

At DataGrail, we believe in a world where people can be in control of their privacy and identity. We're developing the privacy platform modern brands rely on to build customer trust and transparency. We untangle the complexity of data privacy and help brands build privacy programs that work, giving them an easy-to-use platform to automate and scale privacy, and stay compliant with regulations like GDPR, CCPA, and CPRA. With 1000+ pre-built connections with popular apps and infrastructure, the DataGrail Integrations Network is the first of its kind to detect shadow IT that may contain personal data, ensuring the most accurate data discovery. DataGrail services millions of consumers, through companies like Okta, Salesforce, Overstock, Restoration Hardware, NETGEAR, and Outreach, and has 4.8/5 stars on G2.

DeBounce Don't let bounced, throwaway, spam-trapped, or deactivated emails harm your sending reputation or waste your time and money. In just one year, 30% of emails will expire. If more than 10% of your emails are bad, just 44% of them will be delivered. To eliminate any bogus emails, use a bulk email verification program. DeBounce is an email validation SaaS that scans your email list for incorrect or fake email addresses that may bounce, be deleted, or become spam traps. Validating your email list improves delivery while also safeguarding your sender's reputation.

Delighted is a turnkey customer experience platform that helps you measure, monitor, and improve customer experiences. The platform of choice for the world’s top ecommerce brands, Delighted lets you see real-time feedback in your customers’ own words, uncover powerful customer insights, and take action to stay ahead of evolving customer expectations. Collect feedback on the entire customer journey with customizable survey templates (NPS, CSAT, CES, Smileys, 5-star, and Thumbs) optimized across multiple channels (email, SMS text, URL link, web, in-app, kiosk, and QR code). Built-in integrations with your existing tech stack, like Slack, Zendesk, Shopify, and of course, Klaviyo, make acting on customer feedback just as easy.

Digioh Grow your email + SMS message marketing list, capture zero-party data, and drive more sales with high-converting product recommendation quizzes, on-site and email surveys, landing pages, and preference centers. Digioh’s flexible offering empowers brands to take full advantage of the power of data - and quickly reap the rewards by having more personalized on-site, email, SMS, and re-targeting experiences than ever before. For marketers - Digioh allows you to gather more consumer-consented, zero-party data than ANY platform in market, and leverage this data across ALL marketing channels at both micro and macro scale. Increase your conversions by rolling out product recommendation quizzes, implement surveys pre-purchase for first-time website visitors to learn more about who they are, what or who they're shopping for, then build your initial conversation via email or SMS based upon this information - increasing the likelihood of both a new customer gained, higher LTV, and lower opt-out rates. With over 1400 customers, 200+ integrations, and 2 billion bits of zero-party data collected daily - there is no platform stronger than Digioh to help brands drive incremental revenue growth, build customer experience, and harvest + activate zero-party data in forward-thinking, innovative ways. And - with Digioh's full-service design and technical support team - Digioh customers get started faster, driving faster ROI, and incremental success within 30 days!

With Distil.ai, you can collate customer data from all your sources, before letting Distil.ai intelligently interpret, arrange and enrich it ready for you to flow it into all of your action tools, from email, to platform, to data warehouse, BI tools and beyond. Meaning: you get the clean data fuel you need to bring your big marketing ideas to life. Rich ROI for all your Distilling efforts delivering that ultimate customer experience – the one that delights shoppers and drives sales.

DojoMojo is your one-stop-shop for partnership marketing. Connect with top marketers to leverage both solo and multi-brand sweepstakes to grow your email and mobile audiences faster and more effectively.

Donately's online donation software will help improve your donor experience. With our seamless, embeddable donation forms and beautiful donation landing pages, you can provide a modern experience to your donors. Additionally, our simple-to-use dashboard, text messaging capabilities, and peer-to-peer fundraising pages make Donately one of the most well-rounded donation platforms available at a very affordable cost.

DonorPerfect Engage your donors with software designed to supercharge your nonprofit’s fundraising initiatives and cultivate your most valuable relationships.

Duel is the most powerful, off-the-shelf solution that aggregates all of the disparate tools a brand typically uses to manage advocacy and instead brings them all into one platform. Say goodbye to spreadsheets and juggling a bunch of different tools to manage all of your brand's advocacy channels. This centralises all data and content, allowing massive efficiencies and never-before-possible scale. There are two sides to Duel: the external, customer-facing Advocacy Portal and the internal, brand-facing Advocacy Relationship Management (ARM) platform. The Advocacy Portal is a Duel-powered hub on a brand’s website. Here you're able to set challenges (such as signing up to a newsletter, sharing a social post or uploading a piece of content), build a community, reward infinite different advocacy behaviours, drive referrals and purchases. The Duel ARM platform is a powerful AI-powered, no-code database that provides the infrastructure to connect all of your brand advocates and their activities.
Dynamic Yield helps companies quickly deliver and test personalized, optimized, and synchronized digital customer interactions. Marketing, Product, Development, and Digital teams from more than 400 global brands are using Dynamic Yield’s Experience Optimization platform as the technology layer that works alongside existing CMS, Commerce, and ESP solutions to iterate faster and algorithmically match content, products, and offers to each individual for the acceleration of long-term business value. Dynamic Yield operates as a standalone SaaS business under Mastercard’s Data & Services division.

Ecodrive helps brands calculate their carbon footprint, offset it through tree planting, and market the initiative to acquire new customers + drive engagement in a brand's community. Ecodrive allows brands to unlock the sustainable shopper in a cost-effective and transparent way. Every brand gets a custom dashboard to track their impact progress and share it with their customers. We fully support on the marketing side of the initiative and help brands leverage effective strategies to acquire new customers + engage with existing. Ecodrive has numerous strategies around how to most effectively market carbon reduction initiatives.

Elevar provides a better way for Shopify merchants to capture rich, accurate customer journey and conversion data through the use of Google Analytics (UA and GA4) and Google Tag Manager for making decisions about marketing campaigns and ad spend. We reduce the time it takes to implement tracking for new marketing channels and ensure that the conversion data is 95%+ accurate on an ongoing basis, provide real-time error monitoring, and with our server-side tagging, we increase the amount of 1st party data that can be collected.

Email Heatmaps With our easy 1-step setup process, you can analyse the results of all your email marketing campaigns and truly understand which clicks are hot, which clicks are not and the areas that get the most clicks. Simply connect your Klaviyo account and we do the magic! Email Heatmaps is safe, secure and never connects to your mailing list or subscribers! Try it for free today (no credit card required) to experience the power of our Email Heatmap tool to visualise the results of your last email campaign.

Emailable One Single Platform. Full Coverage. Clean old lists, keep them healthy and filter out the bad emails. We’ve got you covered. Clean your lists with ease. Use our bulk email verifier to improve deliverability and campaign performance in no time. * Reduce bounces by removing bad emails from your lists. * Improve your email deliverability by up to 99%. * Add email validation features to your own app using our APIs. Automate your email verification. Put your list cleaning on autopilot and let Monitor do the work for you. Your lists will be automatically synced and reverified every single day. * Keep only deliverable addresses on your list. * Select which emails are removed from your list with our custom configurations. * Improve deliverability and secure inbox placement. Verify emails at the point of capture. Add our real-time email checker to your current HTML forms by just copying and pasting a few lines of code. No custom coding needed. * Block invalid emails before they are added to your database. * Customize which attributes to include. * Integrate into your existing website in no time. Engineered for reliability * Our battle-tested verification algorithm is used by customers in over 170 countries around the world. Our systems are powered by a globally distributed infrastructure and backed by a 99.99% uptime SLA guarantee. Private by design * Our storage servers are located in ISO 27001 and SOC 2 certified data centers, and all information transmitted is protected using 256-bit TLS encryption. 24/7 support * Our dedicated customer support team is ready to help you at any time, and get questions answered quickly and effectively.

Endear is the all-in-one clienteling solution for omnichannel brands. Endear's cloud-based customer relationship management (CRM) and messaging platform empowers two-way communication between retail sales associates and customers via text email, and WhatsApp. Endear also tracks messages and reports which items were purchased, where the sale occurred, and any returns associated, giving you better insight and control over resulting commissions.

Eventbrite brings people together through live experiences. Discover events that match your passions, or create your own with online ticketing tools.


Exit Intelligence Email Capture done for you! Exit Intelligence is a fully managed, behavioral based email capture agency. Creating customized experiences that increase your email capture by 3x. Everything from strategy, design, A/B testing, analyzing results, and continued improvement. Think extension of you team for lead capture.

Faceboo nFacebook is an online social networking service that allows its users to connect with friends and family as well as make new connections.

Fairing uses post-purchase surveys to deliver proprietary, direct-from-consumer data to your marketing stack, integrating and automating consumer response data to produce an always-on stream of insights. It's ground truth, constantly nudging every connected tool in your organization toward customer lifetime value. We generate more consumer responses in a week than most traditional survey platforms do in a year. Relied on by over 1,000 Shopify Plus brands, and named \the last Shopify app we'd uninstall\" by a Top 10 VC's portfolio of DTC brands."

Faraday empowers marketers and developers to predict revenue-generating customer behaviors through an intuitive interface and a robust API, enabling brands to get to know their customers, allocate resources efficiently, and drive smart growth across the funnel.

Fast Simon is the leader in AI-powered shopping optimization. Its revolutionary platform uniquely integrates shopper, behavioral and store signals for strategic Merchandising, Search, Personalization and Optimized shopping experiences that dramatically increase conversions and average order value (AOV). Fast Simon powers shopping optimization at thousands of fast-growing merchants and sophisticated brands. Fast Simon integrates seamlessly with all major eCommerce platforms, including Shopify, BigCommerce, Adobe Magento, Microsoft Dynamics and WooCommerce.

Fera Product Reviews Easily show & grow reviews+ that look great and are trusted by more shoppers. Fera is the easiest reviews app for Shopify with customizable widgets that look beautiful from the start. Fera lets you maximize social proof and customer trust without compromising your brand. EASY CUSTOMER REVIEW, PHOTOS & VIDEO MANAGEMENT * Add, import and edit reviews, photos and videos; touch-up as needed * Real shopper verified badges for reviews * Product ratings and reviews in Google (SEO) BEAUTIFUL RATING, REVIEW & PHOTO WIDGETS * Product reviews or all store reviews lists * Average store rating badges * Customer photo and video submission galleries * Shopper event feeds (with review event) and counters AUTOMATIC REVIEW, PHOTO & VIDEOS GROWTH * Automatic product review, photo review, and video review requests through Klaviyo * 3 review incentive options: discounts, loyalty points or cash-back TRUSTED COMPANY + FASTEST SERVERS * HQ in North America * Strict privacy and security adherence * Live chat, phone, and email support available

FindKeep.Love Grow your email and SMS lists with co-branded sweepstakes. Average email list growth is 5k-25k+ per campaign. Users opt-in and earn extra entries by watching commercials and taking a quiz about your brand. Acquire more customers with every campaign. Beyond list growth, we empower brands to leverage partnership marketing at scale with our portfolio of > 7k+ brands. We take the pain out of partnership marketing while increasing the customer acquisition and LTV from each campaign.

Findologic has been developing modern software solutions for online shops since 2008 and is one of the world’s leading providers today. Just as a helpful sales assistant completes the shopping experience for the in-store customer – so the digital shopping assistant supports and serves the online shopper. We keep our finger on the pulse with our technology partners, agencies, shop systems and customers - with unparalleled results. We radically rethink processes and solutions, so that set up is simple and effortless. Our platform and products automatically adapt to the online shop, which drastically reduces maintenance and support, and at the same time significantly increases flexibility, usability and customer proximity. This also benefits customers in terms of quality and price. As part of a holistic customer journey intelligent technologies from Findologic greatly improve the user experience, leading to satisfied customers.

Fivetran Shaped by the real-world needs of data analysts, Fivetran technology is the smartest, fastest way to replicate your applications, databases, events and files into a high-performance cloud warehouse. Fivetran connectors deploy in minutes, require zero maintenance, and automatically adjust to source changes — so your data team can stop worrying about engineering and focus on driving insights.

Flowbox is a SaaS company offering a visual marketing platform to help brands leverage and distribute social content throughout the buyer journey to increase engagement, social proof and sales. Flowbox helps brands generate and use owned, paid, earned and user-generated content (UGC) from social channels for increased revenue and engagement and an improved customer experience. Through the platform, companies are able to collect, moderate and distribute visual content like photos to their website and social channels, as well as integrate the content with their email marketing. Using images created by your customers in your email marketing will help you leverage your social clout. When you share UGC, you’re engaging with your audience and creating a stronger connection between your brand and the members of your community. Authentic images taken by real people in a real context tend to perform better than branded content and leads to improved results in terms of conversions, traffic and sales. Research shows that using UGC in email generates a higher click-through rate and a 2-3 times better conversion rate. With email as a cornerstone of marketing and tough competition, using engaging email content that improves your performance and resonates with your audience is more important than ever.

Foursixty helps over 3,000 brands turn their Instagram content and UGC into shoppable galleries for their online store and Klaviyo marketing flows, track creators and gifting programs, secure the rights to UGC, and get advanced Instagram insights and analytics.
Frankie\nBoost sales with shopping personalized to each buyer. Frankie provides omnichannel personalization at scale. Allowing you to recommend in real-time exactly what each customer wants. At every stage of the buyer journey. On mobile, web-store, POS and email. The average ROI of Frankie across all stores is an astounding 122x! Testament that true personalization works. Frankie's Enterprise-grade results without the Enterprise price tag make it a popular choice amongst smart merchants.

Fresh Relevance is the real-time personalization and optimization platform to analyze customer data and use it to maximize the customer experience for each individual. By increasing engagement across devices and channels, we help digital marketers drive revenue and customer loyalty.

Friendbuy is a SaaS platform powering referral and loyalty programs for the world’s most recognizable ecommerce companies. Our clients include disruptors such as Casper, Outdoor Voices, FIGS, AWAY and Princess Polly, as well as global Fortune 100s such as Walmart, Intuit, Disney and Nestle. Friendbuy is a technology-first company, enabling brands to scale efficiently and deepen customer loyalty. Our mission is to empower growth marketers through innovation.

Funnel takes messy, siloed data from all of your marketing, advertising and sales platforms, and maps and harmonises the data in real-time. You can then set up scheduled exports to multiple destinations simultaneously, such as business intelligence solutions, visualisation tools and data warehouses, without having to manage multiple configurations. In short, Funnel helps your company create a single source of truth for your data without coding or technical knowledge.

Funraise Create lasting impact with nonprofit-first technology.This integration allows for you to personalize and target emails based on each Contributor's donation and website activity. Here's some of the data we sync from Funraise: When a contribution is made Amount of the contribution Customer information including first and last name, location and how they found your site Whether the donation is recurring and if so, how often it will occur Whether contributor wants to be anonymous

Gameball is a solution designed to help you build and grow a loyal customer base. Gameball helps you turn your clients from one-time purchasers into repeat customers and advocates. We empower you to achieve the sales growth you aspire to through loyalty points, cashback, rewards, tiers & VIPs, discount codes, store credit, and more! Start your FREE trial now! 100% FREE onboarding and consultation services

Gatsby eliminates the arduous process of sourcing micro-influencers, tracking when an influencer posts, and measuring performance. Gatsby discovers micro-influencers from among your website visitors and customers. It does this by gathering Instagram handles through a voluntary opt-in field integrated in your Klaviyo subscriber popup. You are then able to view Instagram profile metrics on these customers, trigger Klaviyo Flows for automated outreach, and increase your brand awareness in an authentic, low-cost way.

Geckoboard makes it effortless to create and share straightforward dashboards that help you, your team and other stakeholders keep track of important metrics. With over 70 integrations, it's quick and easy to connect to the tools you're using day-to-day, build live data visualizations, and put together professional-looking dashboards that anyone can understand at a glance. Share your live dashboards with your team and stakeholders with just a link, with daily or weekly snapshots sent automatically over email and Slack, or invite them to create their own dashboards. For maximum visibility, pair a TV or large screen to your account and you can display beautiful, up-to-date dashboards throughout your workplace.

GemPages All-in-one tool to help you design a high-converting Shopify store without coding skills. Drag & Drop your ideas on GemPages and watch your website pop-up instantly

Getsitecontrol offers a set of professionally-looking widgets for website optimization. With the help of these widgets, you can promote certain pages of your website and drive traffic to them, increase newsletter sign-ups, set up surveys and polls, collect feedback and get more website visitors converted into customers. Getsitecontrol widgets are highly customizable and easy to implement. You won't need to ask your IT for help to get them up and running.

getwiser.ai Wiser is one of the leading Personalized Product Recommendations app, powered by AI. It allows e-commerce stores to show targeted product recommendations based on user behavior, past sales history, AI ML, and purchase history of a customer and based on many such factors. By using Wiser, you can show recommendations in multiple ways like on page recommendations, recommendations in smart popups, dynamic email recommendations using Klaviyo, recommendations in your shipping notifications, and more. It allows to show recommendations on every page of the store, even on the checkout page and thank you page post purchase as well. Wiser helps in increasing your conversion rate by 20-30% and average order value by 10-15%.

Giftnote is a revolutionary and unique approach to the challenges of providing gift messaging and vouchers for eCommerce stores. Online gifting has become an essential way to stay connected with loved ones, and Giftnote simplifies gift messaging by sending paperless, automated gift messages once the parcel has been delivered and vouchers directly to recipients. Automated Gift Messaging Giftnote messages are stored securely and sent to the gift recipient via SMS and Email within 30 minutes of their parcel being delivered. Gift Vouchers by SMS and Email Giftnote enables your customers to purchase and send branded gift vouchers and cards directly to their loved ones via SMS and Email. Convert Users Into Customers Giftnote allows you to communicate directly with your real customer, the gift receiver and encourages continued engagement with your brand.

Gladly Unlike legacy customer service platforms that are case centric, Gladly is designed with people at the center and uniquely enables a single lifelong customer conversation from voice to modern messaging. Gladly powers some of the most innovative consumer companies like Allbirds, Chubbies, REI, and Crate & Barrel to deliver exceptional customer experiences and makes customer service a competitive advantage.

Gleam's marketing apps offer a variety of powerful ways to generate leads and grow your email list. Drive email subscriptions and other valuable actions with contests and sweepstakes or reach the right users at the right time with stylish, targeted opt-in forms that will capture leads & grow your business.

Glew is the leading all-in-one business intelligence platform for ecommerce brands and agencies, with an end-to-end solution that helps merchants easily aggregate, transform and analyze data from across their business. With 90+ technology integrations, Glew helps you visualize and report on all your multichannel data in one place - and get powerful insights to grow your business through intuitive dashboards, automated reports and more. From instantly accessible dashboards for customers, products, channels and more to custom report creation and enterprise business intelligence, Glew provides powerful reporting capabilities for every ecommerce brand. That's why leading merchants choose Glew for the insights they need to drive growth.

Gobot helps brands remove shopper choice paralysis with its Guided Shopping & 1-to-1 Personalization platform. Ask every shopper the right questions, recommend their perfect products, personalize your entire site to their specific needs, answer their questions 24/7, and increase sales.

GoDataFeed helps brands, retailers, and agencies control how and where their products appear online. We sync optimized product data to over 200 ecommerce channels without custom dev work or expensive integrations. With GoDataFeed, users can manage every aspect of their product data and how they deliver it to the digital shelf. Create a single source of truth with a smart catalog that consolidates source data, standardizes formats, and enhances feed attributes. Publish your catalog with industry-leading integrations to Google, Amazon, Facebook, Pinterest, TikTok, and over 200 ecommerce channels. Cascade inventory changes and product updates across channels automatically. * Consolidate catalog data from multiple sources * Standardize product attributes * Optimize feeds to satisfy channel requirements and audience expectations * Inject keywords, UTM tags, and custom values * Customize feed outputs based on channel audience

Google Ads Reach new customers and grow your business with Google Ads, Google's online advertising program.

Gorgias enables thousands of merchants to manage all their customer service channels in a unified platform integrated with Shopify, BigCommerce, and Magento. Perform powerful Shopify actions (like issuing refunds or editing orders) directly in the helpdesk, and leverage automation to answer repetitive questions with personalized answers. The result is better and faster support for your customers, an efficient workflow for your agents, and more sales for your store.

GoTab, Inc, a Restaurant Commerce Platform (RCP), is helping large- and mid-sized restaurants, breweries, bars, hotels and other venues run lean, profitable operations while making guests even more satisfied. GoTab uniquely allows patrons to order and pay through a server (without a smartphone), or order and pay directly from their own mobile phones, or blend the two experiences all on one tab, through its easy-to-use mobile point-of-sale (POS), contactless ordering and payment features, and kitchen management systems (KMS). The guest never has to download a mobile app or create a password. Operators get industry-leading features and actionable data that can be rapidly deployed and adapted to their unique requirements for dramatically reduced costs. Founded in 2016, GoTab processes over $250M transactions per year with operations across the United States.

Govalo GIFT CARDS ARE FOR... * Celebrating a special occasion * Saying \thank you\" or \"I'm thinking of you\" * Making your employees feel appreciated * Birthdays and other life cycle events * The person who has it all or the far-away friend * Holidays and traditions * That last-minute gift * Everyone So why are so many merchants not selling gift cards? Because it is hard.

GRIN is the all-in-one creator management platform helping ecommerce companies build more valuable brands through the power of creator partnerships. GRIN helps you find, recruit, and manage authentic relationships to build big-time brand love.

Groupboss helps you to automate your workflow and saves you from copy-pasting answers from incoming group members every day. If you can save 20 min every single day, that's an extra 10 hours every month. You can use this extra time to focus on your business growth. So, No more copy-pasting & low-level admin tasks. Kudos to Groupboss !!!

Growave is an all-in-one marketing platform that helps Shopify brands reach their audience, engage users, build customer loyalty and increase conversions with ease. It has been successfully providing over 6000+ merchants with 10 features since 2014. It includes Reviews. Rewards and Referral program, Wishlist, Social Login, Social Sharing, Instagram feed, Notifications, Comments, Community and Automated emails.

GrowSurf Launch a customer-to-customer referral program to incentivize word-of-mouth referrals and grow organically. GrowSurf is referral program software for B2C and B2B tech companies that want to automate customer acquisition at the lowest possible cost. Our customers enjoy results like these: 312% return on investment, 30% of new leads from referrals, 15% of ARR from referrals.

GrowthHero helps Shopify merchants build effective affiliate and referral marketing programs. With our Shopify app, you’ll easily create and manage partner programs for your customers, social media influencers, content creators, or resellers.

Heap is the future of digital insights, providing the best alternative to costly, slow and inaccurate legacy analytics. Heap’s low-code, easy-to-use digital analytics software provides the quickest time to insight so teams can create the best possible digital experiences and accelerate their business. Over 8,000 businesses trust Heap to increase revenue, improve conversion, accelerate decision-making, and drive business impact at scale.
Hello Retail e-commerce personalization software will increase the average basket size, convert more customers and increase your customer loyalty. Hello Retail personalizes your e-commerce store by displaying the right product to the right customer at the right time. Hello Retail creates a personalized experience through AI-based behavior recognition, resulting in solid product recommendations, search, and emails that will make more cross- and up sales for your e-commerce. Our approach to our customers is that your success is our success, so you will have experts onboarding and managing your account with you.

Help Scout helps growing businesses manage all their customer conversations in one powerful platform that feels just like an inbox. Quick to set up and easy to use, Help Scout enables customer-facing teams to focus on what really matters: growing customer relationships. Whether customers prefer to engage through email, live chat, or help centers, teams using Help Scout are ready with advanced features for collaboration, organization, and automation.

Hi-iQ by Ematic Solutions\nHow does it work? Hi-iQ monitors and measures the engagement behavior for every subscriber in your database, and treats everyone individually. New users, plus those who regularly click will receive all your normal emails. As Hi-iQ begins to detect “fatigue” it will begin “skipping” mailings to users until and unless they re-engage. Users who are chronically disengaged will be slated for automated re-engagement and only mailed once every 30-90 days. All you have to do is plug it in, and use it as part of your targeting for every mailing, and the magic happens automatically! The best part is that you never pay for Hi-iQ until you see the cost savings first.

Hightouch syncs data from data warehouses and databases to Klaviyo. This makes it simple for marketers to send targeted, personalized messages, thanks to better, more complete data.

HotWax Commerce is an omnichannel order management system that provides retailers with the best return on their inventory by facilitating omnichannel retailing strategies such as same-day Buy Online Pick-Up In Store (BOPIS), Ship From Store, and Pre-Orders in order to increase conversion rates and profitability.

IgnitePOST helps brands create magic moments for their customers. Our real pen and ink handwritten notes cut through the digital noise to surprise and delight customers exactly where they are in their shopping journeys. Our intelligent software integrates with existing systems for easy set up and our robotics work at massive scale using ballpoint pens to give warmth to each note. This software-hardware combination generates perfectly timed and crafted moments that drive customers to action as our above industry average conversion rates show. Our cards are written with real ballpoint pens and are indistinguishable from actual human handwriting. IgnitePOST regularly outperforms email by a factor of 30X and outperforms Direct Mail by a factor of 10X!

Interact, The Quiz Collective Inc\nInteract is all about connecting brands and customers at a human level. Our mission is to empower digital entrepreneurs, creators, and brands just like you to grow your business through empathetic listening, deeper understanding, and true connection. Interact was founded back in 2014 – well before quizzes were hot on social media – because we realized how difficult it was for online marketers to get to know their customers as individual human beings. We wanted to recreate that old school feeling of walking up to a storefront and having an actual conversation with the person running the business. And from that idea, Interact’s quiz builder was born. We help businesses accelerate conversion rates at every stage of the sales funnel – whether you’re building a quiz to generate more high-quality leads, make recommendations on which products or services will be best suited for your needs, or drive engagement with your community.

InvoiceBerry is a simple and intuitive online invoicing software designed with small businesses in mind. The software helps small business owners streamline their invoice and expense related processes while also saving time and money. InvoiceBerry offers 15 pre-built professional invoice templates that are easily customizable through the addition of a company logo, contact information, terms and conditions, and more.

involve.me is a customer engagement platform offering a simple-to-use online no-code funnel builder for various types of interactive content. Publish engaging content in minutes to generate leads, increase online sales, build mailing lists, gather quality data, and collect payments. Using an online drag & drop builder content creators can easily build funnels for any use case, be it simple or advanced. This powerful builder comes with 200+ fully customizable templates for lead generation quizzes, surveys, landing pages, forms (with payment options as well), and interactive calculators. Funnels can be published in minutes and be promoted in a matter of clicks across channels using a dedicated link, personalized email invitations, embed code for webpages or pop-up windows. Collect submissions and gain further insights about your audience. What can you build with involve.me? * Lead Generation Quizzes * Personality Tests * Personalized Surveys & Forms * NPS® Calculators * Smart Sales Funnels * Multiple-Outcome Landing Pages * One-Time or Recurring Payment Forms * Lead Generation Calculators * Custom Price Quote Calculators * Product Configurators and more! Try involve.me out - it has a free tier and it's quick to set up.

Iterate\nIterate makes it easy to learn from your customers, offering smart, user-friendly research tools that look and feel like your brand.

Jebbit is the world's leading Zero-Party Data Platform and enables marketing, product, sales teams and more to create quizzes and interactive digital experiences without ever needing to touch a line of code. These experiences capture the most valuable consumer data that our customers need. Jebbit quizzes and experiences drive an avg. completion rate of 85%+, can be deployed on any channel and on any device, and collect a high volume of zero-party data. The data collected using Jebbit can be activated via Jebbit's 50+ (and growing) API integrations, including the most popular CRMs and marketing software solutions / apps. Businesses use Jebbit to achieve multiple business objectives at once, including: * Driving more sales / online conversions * Capturing more qualified leads * Use profile enrichment / database segmentation * Audience building for improved ad-targeting * Market research and insights * Education * Increased user engagement and personalization capabilities GDPR & CCPA Compliant

Judge.me helps you collect product and site reviews via automatic request emails and display your reviews on user-friendly, customizable widgets on your storefront. Our Forever Free plan covers the most comprehensive features, including review photos/videos, SEO rich snippets, review widgets (Review Widget, Preview Badge stars, Reviews Carousel, etc.) and unlimited emails in 34 languages (Avis, Bewertungen, Reseñas, Avaliações, Recensioni, Vurderinger, Отзывов, 评价, 구매후기, レビュー, 구매후기). With our Awesome plan ($15/month), you can customize all customer-facing texts, and access all advanced features such as custom forms, Q&A, coupons, shop and product groups, Google Shopping feed, etc. With Judge.me, you can drive organic traffic, increase buyer engagement and boost sales with authentic, trustworthy user-generated content.

Junip The easiest way to power reviews together with Shopify & Klaviyo. Junip allows you to fully manage the review request process within Klaviyo, while leveraging our beautiful displays on your store.

Justuno Website conversion tools that grow your business. Convert traffic, build your email list, and increase sales!

Kickbox is a white hat service provider, whose team has been building email technology for more than a decade -- from anti-spam to email encryption. This knowledge and experience comprises the foundation on which Kickbox is built and has helped us become the leader in the email verification industry. Kickbox provides technology that promotes email best practices and improves deliverability. Our mission: ensure customers with opt-in contacts get their message to the inbox and to prevent all the rest from hitting Send.Why Verify Email Addresses? To ensure inbox placement: Major email providers measure bounce rates when deciding whether to route your message in the inbox or in the spam folder. Bounce rates greater than 5% pose a serious risk to inbox placement across all of your email channels. To save money: Storing and sending to invalid and outdated email addresses in your CRMs, ESPs, and Marketing platforms is costly. Add the liability of poor inbox placement, and invalid email addresses can dramatically impact your bottom line. To reclaim a missed opportunity: An invalid email address is a missed connection. By verifying at point of capture with our API, you can identify mistyped email addresses in real time and provide your users the opportunity to correct their mistake before it’s too late. Why Verify With Kickbox? Most accurate & comprehensive results: Only Kickbox owns and operates a proprietary opt-in email verification network. This ensures our customers consistently see greater than 99% deliverability. More importantly, our network allows Kickbox to provide real results for more email addresses, even when other providers return “unknown”. Expertise & support: At Kickbox, our team is your team. With over 12 years in the anti-spam industry, we’re well versed in email deliverability, best practices, compliance, privacy, and more. Whether you’re a marketer, developer, email administrator, or email beginner, contact us for help with your email verification needs. Complete email verification platform: Drag and drop your lists directly into our application. Verify at point-of-capture with our real-time verification API or verify many email addresses with our batch verification API. Import, verify, and export results from your favorite marketing platform or email tool through our integrations.
Kickoff Labs\nGo beyond landing pages. Quickly and easily setup giveaways, sweepstakes, and product launches where fans earn points and rewards for referring friends and promoting your brand!

Klevu is an AI Search and Discovery Platform for ecommerce that leverages machine learning and user behavior analytics to elevate the search experience, and automatically re-merchandise category listing pages and product recommendations. Klevu’s machine learning abilities develop an ongoing understanding of how shoppers are engaging with a website specifically, improving with every click, purchase, and product review. Klevu drives 37% more revenue per web session for retailers that use at least two products in the Product Discovery Platform, which includes Smart Search, Smart Recommendations, and Smart Category Merchandising. The Klevu Product Discovery Platform includes: Search Engine Solution Not your average ecommerce site search Not priced for your average ecommerce website, but we don’t power average websites. Harness the power of real-time user intent and improve your customer’s shopping experience. Combine linguistics and deep machine learning to deliver more enticing search results. Category Merchandising Tool Merchandise your ecommerce categories better Klevu combines AI magic and powerful merchandising tools to power better-than-average category pages. Whether or not you have time to be meticulous, Klevu AI can help squeeze 37% more revenue from every web visit. Product Recommendation System Inspire shoppers to spend more on what they like Average product recommendations take up space. Inspire shoppers with Klevu AI product carousels. Combine AI magic with precision control and squeeze 37% more revenue from every web visit. What makes Klevu unique? * Klevu AI - The AI underpins the Klevu Discovery Platform providing semantic query processing, product catalog enrichment on import real-time user behavior analytics based on shopper searches, product clicks, checkouts, product ratings, and the sentiment within product reviews. * Ease-of-use - With Klevu, making it easy for people to reach their goals is at the core of Klevu - whether that is an easy-to-use admin panel for setting up ecommerce strategies, simple and fast integration, or having full-coverage APIs and SDKs to build product discovery experiences easily from scratch. * Visual Discovery - Powered by Klevu’s intelligent and proprietary AI and image processing technology, Visual Search and Visually Similar product recommendations are available out-of-the-box and require a simple image sync.

Kustomer is the only platform that brings together customer relationship management (CRM), digital engagement, and help desk software into a single omnichannel customer service platform. By unifying customer conversations across multiple channels, and combining tools, processes and data into a single, customer-centric workspace, Kustomer enables brands to transform customer service from a post-sales cost-center into a full lifecycle growth-driver. View the Entire Customer Journey at a Glance Deliver personalized experiences at every touchpoint with a single view of all customer interactions displayed in an actionable timeline view. Meet Demand at Scale Deploy highly personalized chatbots to automate routine support workflows and accelerate res Drive Smarter Processes Leverage real-time customer data to prioritize and route support requests, and maximize efficiency. Unify CX Operations Streamline and link every element of CX operations using turnkey apps from the Kustomer App Marketplace.

LateShipment.com is the world’s only cloud-based Post-purchase Excellence platform built for retail parcel shippers of all sizes to drive memorable order delivery experiences, optimize the returns process while maintaining profitability, and reduce shipping costs by up to 20%. Our feature-packed Delivery Experience Management helps improve visibility and drive customer delight post-purchase. Our Returns Management platform makes returns effortless and efficient — all while maintaining profitability. Our Automated Shipping Refunds solution brings better performance accountability to shipping carrier services by recovering millions of dollars in refund claims. LateShipment.com seamlessly integrates with over 600 popular shipping carriers and business tools including Helpdesk, eCommerce, OMS, CRM, and Marketing Automation tools to help you craft delightful post-purchase experiences at scale.

LeadDyno is easy affiliate marketing software – both for you and your affiliates. Setup an affiliate / referral program in just minutes with our affiliate tracking software. You can manage your affiliates and their payouts easily and efficiently with LeadDyno. Also, learn what online marketing channels are working the best with our tracking campaign feature, so that you can intelligently allocate your online advertising spend going forward.

LeadQuizzes Want to impress your leads, understand their journey, and cut time to conversion? With LeadQuizzes, you can create mobile-ready quizzes, surveys, and interactive forms to engage, grow and learn about your audience.

LeadsBridge is an iPaaS automation solution that enables marketers and advertisers to enhance their omnichannel strategy and build their own interconnected marketing ecosystem. LeadsBridge fulfills your integration needs, focusing on bridging gaps between top advertising platforms - Google, Facebook, LinkedIn, and TikTok - and main marketing platforms - CRM, email marketing software, autoresponder, and so much more. LeadsBridge is also equipped to develop tailor-made integrations based on your unique business needs. The LeadsBridge platform is specifically designed for companies that want to streamline their advertising activities by integrating their marketing stack with Facebook & Instagram Ads, Google Ads, LinkedIn Ads, and TikTok Ads. LeadBridge offers a free plan, which includes 100 leads per month and one running bridge. You can then upgrade to paid plans to gain more features. All plans are GDPR and CCPA fully compliant, keeping all customer data safe.

LeadsTunnel connects leads from your digital marketing funnels to Klaviyo in real-time, allowing you to engage and convert your leads into sales with ease. We understand leads are your business’ biggest asset. So we have developed the following features to help you efficiently nurture your leads when integrated with Klaviyo, and improve your sales flow process for maximum results: Automate Your Leads Data In Real-Time All leads generated from your digital marketing campaigns such as Facebook and Google can be automatically synced to your CRM and email service provider of choice in real-time. This means no more manual export of leads, faster lead response time, and higher chances of turning your leads into sales! Instant Lead Notifications Your chance of closing a qualified lead into a sale can drop significantly in matter of minutes if no follow-up strategy is implemented. With LeadsTunnel, you can receive an instant email and SMS notification each time a new lead is acquired so that you can engage with them while they are still highly interested in your offer! Prioritize Your Leads With Lead Scoring Maximize your closing ratio by engaging with leads that are worth your time. Our lead scoring algorithm identifies leads as cold, warm, or hot based on the accuracy of information submitted to you and their level of engagement such as opening an automated email. You know when your leads are active, they are the best ones to follow-up with first! Manage Your Leads In One Centralized Platform Even if you don’t have a CRM or email service provider, our Lead Manager is a cost-effective solution to store all your lead information. Together with our in-app email and SMS feature, you can create conversations with your leads and manage them with a customized tagging system for maximized efficiency. Streamline Your Leads To Multiple Touchpoints Get in front of your customers when and where they need you. With LeadsTunnel, you can sync your leads data to as many CRMs and email service providers as you want in real-time! We are integrated with over 20+ email service and CRM platforms so that you can craft a strategic sales funnel to convert your leads!

Lexer Fragmented customer data = fragmented customer experiences. Lexer’s Customer Data Platform helps brands and retailers genuinely understand their customers and engage them with the experiences they deserve. Built for retail, our tools and team help you master your customer data at every touchpoint—from marketing to sales to service—so you can deepen customer loyalty and drive profitable growth.

Lightspeed creates commerce technology for small retailers and restaurants.

LimeSpot is an AI-driven merchandising platform that gives marketing and eCommerce teams the power to create targeted, high performing shopping experiences that delight customers, increase sales and reduce the merchandising burden on retailers. Using the largest independent eCommerce dataset, we combine shopper profiles, product characteristics and site behavior to create unique customer journeys from first touch through post-purchase.

Litmus empowers you to put email first, collaborate better, and increase conversions.
 We make it easy for email teams to build, test, review, and analyze emails. With Litmus you can preview your emails across 100+ email clients, apps, and devices to ensure an on-brand, error-free subscriber experience. Plus you can optimize for every subscriber and every inbox with in-depth spam testing that lets you identify and fix deliverability issues before you send.

Littledata is an ecommerce data platform that works with your analytics setup to ensure accurate ecommerce tracking. Their unique combination of client-side and server-side tracking makes it easy to capture complete, accurate ecommerce data and send it to the tools you already use, including Segment, Google Analytics (UA and GA4) and Facebook Conversions API. Multi-channel marketing attribution for Shopify and Klaviyo. Connect your Klaviyo campaign data with complete sales and marketing data.

Lob Programmatically send personalized postcards, letters, checks, and more to your customers with comprehensive hyper personalized per-piece mail tracking and analytics. Whether you're sending 1 piece of mail a month, or 100 million pieces of mail each month; we utilize our network of national print partners to create and deliver mail to your customers in record time.
Loop\nLoop is the automated exchanges platform that drives customer lifetime value and saves more sales by creating a shopping experience inside the returns experience. We've automated more than 15 million returns and retained more than $400 million in revenue for Shopify's most innovative brands including Chubbies, Allbirds, and FIGS.

Loox is a marketing solution that allows Shopify merchants to collect tons of reviews with photos from happy customers in order to create elegant online stores that shoppers can trust. With a 4.9/5 Shopify App Store rating based on over 10,000 reviews, it is the #1 Product Reviews solution on Shopify, serving over 100,000 merchants worldwide, including over 1,400 Shopify Plus stores.
LoudCrowd We help brands achieve Customer Led Growth. Get more of your customers creating content (UGC) on social media. Why pay for influencers when your customers will create content for free?

LoyaltyLion is a data-driven loyalty and engagement platform that powers ecommerce growth. A loyalty program is about unlocking real insights to increase customer lifetime value. With LoyaltyLion, you can build a better understanding of what drives longer-lasting customer relationships, and use those insights to connect and accelerate your existing marketing efforts. Proven to increase retention and spend, LoyaltyLion is trusted by thousands of fast-growth ecommerce merchants worldwide.

Lytics customer data platform enables marketers to build personalized digital experiences and 1-to-1 marketing campaigns by focusing on behavioral data and combining it with our advanced data science and machine learning decision engine. In a world where brands need to compete with Amazon, Netflix, and Spotify, Lytics help them thrive.

MailOptin is a WordPress lead generation and email automation plugin to grow and engage Klaviyo email lists. MailOptin grows your list by displaying targeted email capture forms across your site with popups, slide-ins, notification bars, in-post subscription forms, sidebar widgets, and more. Never lose customers and subscribers that took you a lot of effort and money to build. MailOptin can automatically email your blog posts to your email subscribers. You can choose whether to send the email as soon as posts are published, or as a daily, weekly, and monthly newsletter roundup.

MailTimers is an online app designed to lighten the process of countdown timers creation. Thanks to its well-crafted UI & UX builders you can customize and adjust a timer to match your needs perfectly. Along with the main features the MailTimers app provides you with the numbers of additional settings: transparent background, advanced colors, background picture, expiry message, and more. It gives you full control over the final result and makes working with MailTimers extremely easy. MailTimers has at its core an advanced technology called Imagemagick. It’s used to create GIF images astounding in their quality. Also service allows you to customize designs using Adobe Photoshop PSD layout, and create evergreen countdown. These are the points which really make MailTimers stand out amongst its competitors. MailTimers has one of the most accessible prices on the market, and can be used free for a limited number of views before you are ready to make a decision about subscription.

Maisie is the conversational customer experience platform built for e-commerce businesses. Maisie engages your customers in conversations 24/7 to: Boost your sales & conversions Help your visitors discover products, find important information and get irresistible deals to increase your online sales. Slash your customer service workload Automatically respond to customer questions 24/7 and provide real-time order status updates. Streamline your support & increase customer retention. Capture leads & re-engage them Grow your subscriber list with compelling opt-ins. Recover lost sales by bringing visitors back to your site via Messenger and email.

Make lets you design, build, and automate your email marketing tasks by connecting Klaviyo with thousands of apps in just a few clicks. Make is a visual platform that lets you design, build, and automate anything –from simple tasks to complex workflows —in minutes. With Make, you can send information between Klaviyo and thousands of apps to grow your customer base and boost revenue. It’s fast and easy to use, visually intuitive, and it requires zero coding expertise. Connect Klaviyo with 1000+ popular apps in just a few clicks, without any coding. Missing an app in our library? Use Make’s no-code toolkit, which includes the generic HTTP app that allows you to connect to any app or service with an API. Make allows you to visually create and automate workflows. Use the playful drag-and-drop interface to connect apps and build limitless workflows called scenarios. Set your scenarios to run instantly or according to a schedule, or watch the scenario run in real time whenever you need.

Malomo Customer retention is the new growth strategy – plant the seeds for retention with a world-class shipping experience. Delight and retain customers with personalized and marketing-enabled order-tracking notifications and tracking pages.

Marketplacer is a global technology led platform which enables our customers to create all types of marketplaces. Our Vision To be the preferred platform for leading global marketplaces Our Mission We license and leverage our marketplace platform and expertise to make it easier to create successful, scalable and limitless online marketplaces.

Matcha Create content that converts Write blog posts optimized for engagement and conversions Instantly embed product listings and subscriber forms to turn readers into buyers and subscribers. Engage and understand your audience Save time while fueling your marketing channels with engaging licensed content, instantly-publishable from our library of 12,000+ articles. Rapidly discover the content topics that resonate most with your varied segments. Distribute, Measure, and Strategize Easily share your content with your Facebook followers and email subscribers. With Matcha insights, measure what content drives the most traffic, engagement, subscribers, and sales to make data-driven decisions.

Mention Me empowers brands to harness the exponential power of fans through referral. Since 2013, our unique Referral Engineering® approach has delivered more than 4.5m referrals totalling USD $1.5bn in revenue for 450 brands, including Charlotte Tilbury, Farfetch, Nutmeg, Pret a Manger and Puma. We make brands think advocacy-first by turning referral into a strategic acquisition channel that enhances wider marketing activity and the customer experience. This vision is supported by our fast-growing partner network, which includes Klaviyo. Backed by Octopus Ventures and Eight Roads, we’ve raised $32 million in funding since 2018.

MESA lets you point and click application endpoints into automated workflows without writing a line of code. Now you can focus on the bigger picture knowing that your work is getting done reliably and efficiently. Get started with ready-made workflow templates, or start from scratch. MESA also unifies all your tools to provide a central source of truth for your business. And with 24/7 support and no-cost setup, now's the perfect time to get MESA!

Mi9 Retail is the fastest growing provider of enterprise software for retailers, wholesalers, and brands. We believe that a great experience takes place when optimized product planning and inventory management intersects perfectly with skillful customer engagement and point-of-purchase execution. The results are better revenue and margin performance, greater customer engagement and value, and a more satisfied, loyal workforce.

Middle is a flexible integration platform as a service (iPaaS) for marketing agencies, enterprises and SaaS companies. Use out-of-the-box integrations in our catalog, customize them to your exact requirements, or add your own private apps. Predictable pricing and no limits, other than what your provisioned hardware can handle.

Movable Ink’s platform helps digital marketing leaders create personalized content at scale across their marketing campaigns by leveraging all relevant data no matter where it lives. With Movable Ink, marketers can free their data from silos to auto-generate images with millions of unique variations that update based upon a recipient's recent interactions.

Nacelle is the headless commerce platform for composing best-of-breed solutions. FTD, Something Navy, Boll & Branch and Barefoot Dreams have chosen Nacelle to go headless and accelerate time to value while seeing dramatic improvements in webstore performance, developer velocity, and flexibility. Nacelle is a 100% remote company that believes in core values of: forever learning, honesty and integrity, ownership, and teamwork. It is backed by Tiger Global, Inovia Capital, Index Ventures, Accomplice, Lerer Hippeau, High Alpha and Silas Capital. To learn more visit www.nacelle.com.

Narvar Our best-in-class platform creates customer confidence from order placement through return for 1,200+ brands. * Take control of customer expectations. Regain control of issues that are out of your hands — like fulfillment or carrier delays — with 50+ proactive and predictive customer communications to keep customers informed. * Reduce WISMO and lower support costs. Avoid costly “Where is my order?” calls by controlling customer expectations. Keep customers in lockstep with their orders through real-time updates throughout the delivery and returns journey. * Meet customers where they are. Provide personalized omnichannel communication throughout the delivery journey via email, SMS, WhatsApp, and Line. Create consumer preferences to communicate on their channels of choice. * Drive influenced revenue. Increase consumer LTV through personalized offers and marketing opportunities within each customer communication. Transform your post-purchase experience today. Learn more at www.narvar.com

Neon CRM Robust CRM software and inspiring websites designed to help your nonprofit grow, inspire, and scale.

Newsletter Glue Newsletter Glue is a WordPress plugin that lets you write newsletters the way you blog. Connect Klaviyo and write newsletters directly inside the WordPress block editor. It’s for established bloggers, publishers, business owners, membership sites, and newsrooms looking to publish newsletters more consistently and quickly. On average, Newsletter Glue saves customers an hour per newsletter. Design and publish emails: Benefit from the powerful WordPress block editor when creating and publishing your emails. Create patterns, templates and customise your email design with our range of email-ready newsletter blocks. Grow your subscriber base: Our subscriber form block can be inserted into any post or page in seconds and allows subscribers to sign up to your email list directly from your site. Consistent newsletter archives: Newsletter archives published directly onto your site

Nexla, with its automated approach to data engineering, has for the first time made it possible for data users to get ready-to-use data from any system without any need for connectors or code. Nexla uniquely combines no-code, low-code, and a developer SDK to bring together users across skill levels on to a single platform. With its data-as-a-product core, Nexla combines integration, preparation, monitoring, and delivery of data into a single system regardless of data velocity and format. Today Nexla powers mission critical data for JPMorgan, Doordash, LinkedIn, LiveRamp, J&J, and other leading enterprises across industries.

NiftyImages provides an affordable solution for real-time email personalization; allowing marketers to quickly create and modify endless images across an entire email strategy. Our tools help improve user engagement and strengthening brand loyalty by delivering a personalized, visual experience for the subscriber at the moment of engagement.

Nosto enables retailers to deliver personalized digital shopping experiences at every touch point, across every device. An AI-Powered Personalization Platform designed for ease of use, Nosto empowers retailers to build, launch and optimize 1:1 omnichannel marketing campaigns and digital experiences without the need for dedicated IT resources or a lengthy implementation process. Leading commerce brands in over 100 countries use Nosto to grow their business and delight their customers. Nosto supports its clients from its offices in New York, Los Angeles, London, Paris, Berlin, Stockholm, and Helsinki.

Nuvemshop by Conexa.ai We are the leading e-commerce platform in Latin America, which empowers and motivates 90k+ entrepreneurs to show the world what they are capable of on our Nuvemshop and Tiendanube platforms Nuvemshop has been in the market for 10 years, and we are considered one of the 5 most valuable companies in Latin America We have a team of more than 600 experts who work together in Brazil, Argentina and Mexico to enable all entrepreneurs to go further and further in their business in an increasingly digital economy

Octane AI is the #1 platform for Klaviyo brands to collect data and recommend products with quizzes and pop ups. This zero-party data can be synced instantly to your Klaviyo account and can be used to supercharge your marketing: * Creating Klaviyo segments (Create different segments based on quiz data) * Personalizing Klaviyo flows (Send different emails to different people using quiz data) * Personalizing Klaviyo emails (Dynamically change the text, blocks, and products inside of an email based on quiz data) Thousands of Shopify and Shopify Plus merchants use Octane AI to learn more about their customers and personalize their entire marketing.

ODICCI is a customer engagement platform that captures and enriches customer profiles, through interactive, engaging digital experiences. We provide unmatched security, scalability and usability. Use ODICCI’s customer engagement platform to create, test and measure engaging interactive experiences — reveal marketing (scratch, slide, peel to reveal), games, quizzes, product recommendation engines, instant wins, advent calendars, surveys, configurators. The ODICCI platform makes it easy to build, publish, and manage interactive experiences at scale. In a couple of hours, users can create engaging campaigns that will surprise, captivate audiences and increase conversion whilst capturing valuable customer data. No developers needed. ODICCI's experiences generate high opt-in and conversion rates which can be published across any digital channel.

Okendo enables Shopify retailers to leverage their most powerful asset: their customers. Okendo allows brands to showcase customer-generated content including ratings & reviews, photos/videos, and Q&A. Brands use this content to build trust, drive conversions and maximize CLTV. Okendo doesn’t force a trade-off between functionality and affordability. That’s why thousands of Shopify Plus retailers such as SKIMS, Knix and Skinnydip London trust Okendo to power their customer marketing.

Olark Make your business human by using live chat software for sales, marketing and customer support on your website.

Olo is a leading on-demand commerce platform powering the restaurant industry’s digital transformation. Millions of orders per day run on Olo’s enterprise SaaS engine, enabling brands to maximize the convergence of digital and brick-and-mortar operations. The Olo platform provides the infrastructure to capture demand and manage consumer orders from every channel. With integrations to over 100 technology partners, Olo customers can build digital experiences with the largest and most flexible restaurant commerce ecosystem on the market. Over 400 restaurant brands use Olo to grow digital sales, maximize profitability, and preserve direct consumer relationships.

Omneo Focus more on retention, advocacy, engagement and growth at every stage of the customer lifecycle with Omneo - the CX toolkit powering better shopping experiences for your best customers. We believe in mutually beneficial relationships and intentional customer participation. Our centralised customer profile, clienteling interfaces for stores, and fully integrated loyalty mechanics, are designed to bring utility to customers and the people that serve them. For too long Customer Data Platforms (CDPs) and CRMs have focused only on campaign management and marketing outcomes. While these are important, we felt that it was time for a platform to focus on the needs of the customer and the people that serve them. One that enables profitable behaviour rather than only driving it, and was customer-centric, permission-based, and omni-channel by design. What it is While not claiming to be any one of these things, Omneo is commonly used by brands as a: * Single View of Customer / 360° Customer View * CDP - Customer Data Platform * CRM - Customer Relationship Manager * Loyalty Program Management or Incentive Engine * Clienteling Platform * Customer Preference Centre * Omnichannel Wishlist Manager * Personalised customer outreach platform * eReceipt, CSAT and NPS survey manager What it isn't While the customer data in Omneo is valuable, we are not * A campaign management tool* * An Email marketing system* * A segmentation or audience management tool* * A customer reporting tool* * A 3rd party tracking platform* * Collecting anonymous user data - instead we only record zero-party, opt in profiles, transactions and interactions * Using you customer data outside of your own brand’s environment for any other purpose * But we integrate with plenty of great platforms that do these things Choose the feature set thats right for you and evolve when you're ready. Transact Along with customer profile creation, management and sync, track all known customer and guest transactions to make this history available to the customer and the brand. Experience Allow your customers, store teams and service teams to add value to a customer profile through face to face experiences and new online functionality Incentivise Develop a personalised and event driven incentive or loyalty program linked to customer transactions and interactions Curate Allow customers and staff to explicitly record engagement with products outside of purchase, view or likes. Also create custom lists of customers ‘little black book’ style for your store teams

Omniconvert is a Customer Value Optimization platform that can help eCommerces understand, monitor and analyze their Customer Insights such as Customer Lifetime Value, RFM groups, Retention Rate, etc.

ONE seamlessly integrates 18 powerful tools (Checkout Upsell, SMS, Email, Pop Ups, Gift Cards & More) into one brand making the customer experience feel more personalized. We offer: * One-Click Upsell (Post-Purchase Checkout Page) * Pop-ups - Opt-in, gamified, informational * SMS & Email Marketing - Newsletters, Double Opt-in, Bulk TCPA compliant SMS * Rewards - Coupon manager, Gift Cards * Social Proof - Real time sales history, live visitor counter * Abandonment Protectors - Browse recovery, Cart recovery, Checkout recovery * And much more - product upsell, Birthday specials, A/B testing All of our tools work harmoniously to let Merchants carefully craft their customers' journeys, so that they can maximize the long-term value of their client relationships by increasing the rate of customer conversions. It is the must-have app for the first time or veteran eCommerce Merchant. In short, ONE helps merchants make more money!

OneClickUpsell by Zipify Add one click, post-purchase upsells to your Shopify store. Increase sales and average order value without the risk of distracting customers and losing your initial order. The offer pages are easily customizable, and customers can add products to their purchase with just one click — no re-entering payment info!

OpenCart A free shopping cart system. OpenCart is an open source PHP-based online e-commerce solution.

Opinew is a Shopify product review app, that helps thousands of merchants successfully request, import, and display reviews on a range of widgets. Get 30% more conversions with the power of AI Opinew uses AI to automatically select the best converting reviews at scale. Opinew's merchants see up to 30% uplift in sales compared to the standard. Import Reviews Easily import reviews from Amazon, AliExpress, and eBay to supplement your products and begin building product trust. Automated Request Reviews Use our e-mail SMS, & Printer QR code review requests to get text, photo, and video reviews on autopilot. Reward reviewers with coupons to increase customer lifetime value and repeat purchases. Review Widgets Convert more customers through beautiful widgets displayed at every step of their journey. SEO & Page Speed Increase your SEO ranking via rich snippet integration. Display stars in organic search results. Maintain your Page Speed - Opinew widgets are aggressively optimized for loading speed too.

optilyz GmbH optilyz enables companies to run more customer-centric, sustainable, and profitable direct mail campaigns. The tool is used by hundreds of companies across Europe. It empowers marketers to integrate letters, postcards, and self-mailers into their cross-channel marketing as well as automate and better personalize their campaigns.

OptiMonk offers tools to increase and retain website traffic. Some of the advanced features offered by OptiMonk include multi-page popups, mobile-optimized and responsive popups, geo-targeting, A/B testing, and more. Key Features: * Product Element: Seamlessly embed product images and information from your Shopify store directly into your popups. * Auto Coupon Redeem: Boost your Coupon Redemption Rate by automatically inserting the coupon code in the order form after the visitor claimed it in a popup. * Multi-step Popup Campaigns. Increase subscriptions by breaking your campaigns into engaging step-by-step popups. * Assisted revenue: Track exactly how much $$$ can be attributed to your popup campaigns. * A/B testing: Create unlimited versions of your campaign and track which changes result in more conversions! The paid versions of OptiMonk’s plugin allow you to: * A/B test your popups to optimize their performance * Use popups on up to 10 domains * Access priority tech support

Optimove is a multi-channel marketing hub used primarily by B2C businesses to scale CRM marketing personalization and segmentation. Used by Marketing and CRM experts at more than 500 high-velocity, promotional, data-centric businesses, Optimove provides brands gain a deep understanding of their customers’ behavior in order to create, orchestrate, measure, and optimize customer-led journeys across channels. Optimove implements a science-driven approach to planning, orchestrating, and optimizing a complete, hyper-personalized CRM Marketing plan. By combining predictive customer analytics, AI optimization technologies and a multi-channel campaign orchestration engine, Optimove helps marketers deliver the right message via the right channel to every customer, every time. The result is customer-led journeys that increase customer engagement, retention, and lifetime value.

OptinMonster is the #1 most powerful conversion optimization toolkit in the world. Instantly grow your email list, get more leads and increase sales with OptinMonster + Klaviyo.
Order Desk\nConnect Order Desk to hundreds of the print, shopping and shipping companies you work with so you can manage your orders in one central place. Use our built-in features that organize, split, report and submit your order information wherever it needs to go.

Oribi provides codeless analytics about the user journey and meaningful user actions on your website.

Outgrow helps top brands generate new traffic and improve conversions through custom-built price, savings, or ROI calculators as well as viral quizzes, recommendations, forms, surveys, chatbots, polls, contests, and assessments.

Oviond is a digital marketing monitoring and reporting software that bring all your data together into a single platform. By combining your data into a single view you can answer your most important digital marketing questions!

PageFly is a user-friendly Shopify Page Builder App that allows store owners to build a stunning Shopify shop with drag-and-drop features and no coding needed. With 75,000+ active users worldwide and 3.9k+ reviews on Shopify App Store, Shopify is ranked as #1 Page Builder in the Shopify market. Some app highlights: - Custom designs for laptop, tablet, and mobile - Direct in-page SEO tools - Analytics for tracking - Smart form - In-page HTML, CSS and JavaScript - Saved section and version history - Built-in animation - Custom hover effect - 24/7 Customer Live Chat Support

Parcel Panel The #1 Shopify order tracking solution. All-in-one order tracking solution with 1000+ couriers supported worldwide, branded & customized tracking page, proactive email notification, no need to answer “where is my order?” Reduce more than 70% support service.
Peel\nPeel reveals purposeful business insights from your ecommerce data so you can capture repeatable and sustainable growth with your customers. With 100+ key ecommerce metrics and hundreds of segmentation options you will reveal key growth opportunities in seconds. Peels makes it easy to see the entire picture and possibilities of how customers engage with your brand.

Penny Black is the only marketing channel with a 100% open rate that allows brands to use the unboxing moment to retain customers, increase CLTV and build loyalty. Our platform and print tech helps ecommerce marketers to create hyper-personalised campaigns and flyers that can be added to customers’ orders during the pick and pack process. These flyers have a 15-20% conversion rate and allow brands to generate £2.20 in additional revenue per flyer sent.
Personizely\nPersonizely is a Conversion Marketing Toolkit which helps you convert visitors with beautiful email capture, reduce abandoned cart with exit pop ups (exit intent) and boost sales with cross sell, upsell popups, product recommendation, sales motivation bar, announcement bar, smart bar, header bar, and other sales popups.

Pimberly is an innovative SaaS-based Product Information Management (PIM) platform. The UK-based team behind Pimberly has helped businesses around the world to manage their product information more efficiently. The platform allows retailers, distributors, suppliers and manufacturers to harness and enrich increasing volumes of product data, across multiple channels and regions – enabling them to get products to market faster and improve sales.
Pixlee TurnTo\nModern brands need to showcase authentic and diverse content to connect with their audience. Pixlee TurnTo enables brands to scale Social UGC, Influencer Content, and Ratings & Reviews across the most valuable customer touchpoints, turning a brand's community into its most valuable marketing asset. Our comprehensive solution helps brands discover, collect, permission, tag, publish and analyze the top-performing community content to achieve higher engagement rates and better ROI. We work with brands like Alo Yoga, Nike, and Kimpton Hotels to help them create engaging and high converting customer journeys through customer-powered commerce.

Playable We are focussed on Video Email - Reach your email audience in the body of any email, on any device, on any connection, at the moment of open, with high quality autoplay video email. Videos of uptown 30 seconds can be embedded within your email, using any type of source video, be it a file on your computer or a hosted video on YouTube, TikTok or Facebook.
Plobal Apps\nTurn your Shopify store into a native mobile app using Plobal and drive 29% more sales, while retaining loyal customers for the long run. Plobal is trusted by brands like Steve Madden, Matt & Nat and Hobbiesville to power their highest performing, and most engaging sales channel.
Polar Analytics#1 multi-channel analytics software for Shopify brands. Save 3 hours of manual work every day, connect all your eCommerce data to Polar Analytics and get actionable insights to grow profit.

Poplar is a self service platform that allows brands to easily expand their marketing mix into the direct mail world. With no SaaS fees, contracts, or minimums- Poplar truly allows you to scale your direct mail efforts at your own pace. With the ability to send both one off and triggered campaigns, you can create highly personalized outreach that is tailored specifically to your target segments. On top of being able to create highly custom mailers through our dynamic creative, you can then track the success of these campaigns in real time through our platform. Target any stage in your sales funnel with some of our most common use cases: * Abandoned cart retargeting * Reengage lapsed buyers * Retargeting email sign ups * VIP and or top customer segment targeting * LAL Modeling Interested in learning more? Get in touch with our team for a personalized demo by clicking the learn more button above!

Poptin is a lead capture platform that helps you convert more visitors into subscribers leads and sales with beautiful popups and inline forms.

PostPilot makes it as easy as email for ecom & DTC brands to boost revenue and profits with triggered, personalized direct mail. Create dynamic segments, launch one-off and automated campaigns in minutes, and track ROI right in your real-time dashboard. Clone your best performing email campaigns with direct mail and drive incremental revenue from those customers and prospects not engaging with your emails or unsubscribed from your list. Campaigns like: * win-backs * abandoned carts * cross-sells * VIPs * welcome * and more! Plus acquire new customers with our exclusive MailMatch™ technology. Instantly identify physical addresses for your email prospects and retarget them via mail with a postcard. Our complimentary concierge service can help with design, strategy and optimization so you literally don't have to lift a finger. And our best in class pricing starts at just $.49/card including postage. We're built for ecom. We know what works. Try PostPilot now, risk-free.

preezie is a retail experience platform that brings the in-store guided shopping experience online and helps brands capture zero party data. They currently work with over 120 global brands including DELL, Guitar Center, Adore Beauty, Lorna Jane, Baby Bunting, Everlast, Lego and Culture Kings and are growing at a rapid rate. Ultimately, preezie supercharges the eCommerce customer experience, drives up conversions, increases first party data and email capture, reduces return, alleviates customer service & much more. Currently 900,000 shoppers use preezie every month and their brands have seen engagement rates over 85%, conversions rise well above 7% (often 3-4 times higher than their average) and email capture rates increase up to 600% higher than average.

Prehook quizzes help brands improve conversion rate, gather more leads (email and SMS) and learn more about customers: their problems, goals, habits, and anything else that is necessary to create better marketing campaigns and offers.

Presto-Changeo (PoCo) develops unique and high-performance ecommerce Apps and Modules that boost productivity, add features and improve ecommerce shops around the world. Along with our full-service design and development agency EIP Concepts CA, Inc., we are seasoned experts in all things ecommerce related, based in New York City and Los Angeles, and delivering solutions worldwide.

Privy enables online stores to increase conversion, grow their list, and reduce abandoned carts through targeted onsite displays.

Punchh, a PAR Technology (NYSE: PAR) brand, is the leading loyalty, offers, and engagement platform for restaurants, groceries, retailers, and convenience stores. For over a decade, Punchh has helped the world’s favorite brands create data-driven, modern loyalty experiences that empower physical retailers to turn anonymous buyers into brand superfans.

Qgiv Fundraising technology to increase your impact and raise more — designed with you in mind.

Qualifio Customer engagement and loyalty made easy for brands who want to build meaningful relationships. We founded Qualifio in Belgium in 2011, with a passion for empowering people with the right tools and the desire to provide an innovative way of doing marketing. We truly believe in the power of interactivity and its ability to engage and push consumers down the conversion funnel. This is what led us to embark on the Qualifio adventure! Today, Qualifio provides brands with two powerful, complementary and easy-to-use SaaS platforms: Qualifio Engage, a data collection and interactive marketing platform, and Qualifio Loyalty, an interaction-based loyalty platform. Brands and media groups like L’Oréal, RTL, MediaMarkt, DailyMail, Decathlon, Nestlé or Lille OSC engage with their audiences daily, thanks to Qualifio. We have over a decade of experience in interactive marketing and data collection, with almost 70 employees and a unique work culture built on strong values.

Raptor Services is a market-leading Personalization and Customer Data Platform provider creating relevant experiences from customer data. Our solutions enable you to: * Recognize users and their behavior across channels and platforms * Offer personalized content and product recommendations * Make data available to all activation channels from our Customer Data Platform

Rebuy is an omnichannel personalization platform empowering ecommerce brands on Shopify to increase AOV, accelerate sales, and grow quickly. Unlike other options, Rebuy provides a full suite of personalization, marketing, and retention services, white-glove support, and a customizable shopping cart. Boasting native integration with Shopify and Recharge, Rebuy also integrates with Klaviyo and any other e-commerce platform through its RESTful API. Trusted by 4,000+ retailers worldwide, Rebuy's powerful technology is redefining data-powered shopping experiences.

Recart is the Messenger marketing app for ecommerce stores. It helps merchants grow revenues With more than 150,000 merchant installs and 5,000+ reviews, Recart is being used by all categories of merchants. From just-launched dropship stores to leading DTC brands, everyone can drive serious revenue from Recart Messenger marketing. Support: support@recart.com
Recharge is the leading subscription management solution, helping ecommerce merchants of all sizes launch and scale subscription offerings. Recharge’s subscription billing and payment management solutions are designed to help merchants grow by increasing revenue and customer lifetime value while reducing operating costs and churn. Recharge powers subscriptions for more than 50 million subscribers across 15,000 merchants, including fast-growing brands such as Verve Coffee, Bokksu, Who Gives A Crap, Bite, Keap Candles, and Bumpin Blends. For more information, visit https://rechargepayments.com/.

ReConvert, the top-rated upselling solution for ambitious Shopify brands. Say hello to a bigger AOV today! Smart brands use ReConvert to add up to 15% of net revenue via upsells and cross-sells. Find out how hundreds of Shopify Plus users such as Tushy, Swanky agency, MikeTyson.com, Act+Acre, The California Beach Co. & Eastern Standard Provisions use ReConvert to power up their revenue. Highlights: * One click-upsells with native Shopify checkout integration * No expertise required - Instant set-up & automatic funnel build * Magic designer function so every offer is exactly on-brand * Drag-and-drop thank you page builder (add offers, surveys, birthday collector & more.) * 24/7 support & 3000+ five star reviews “With ReConvert everything is geared towards getting that extra revenue. For merchants, it’s pretty much extra sales for no extra work.” Harrison Gross CEO, Lucyd

Recurly provides enterprise-class subscription billing management for thousands of businesses worldwide.

ReferralCandy is an ecommerce store plugin that helps brands acquire new customers while retaining existing ones through word-of-mouth marketing. Turn your customers into your marketing team by encouraging them to promote your brand among their friends and family -- keeping them engaged and loyal to your brand.

Refersion helps eCommerce merchants manage, track, and grow their influencer and affiliate networks. Our SaaS platform is an affiliate and influencer marketing platform that you can launch in minutes; we handle the heavy lifting so you can focus on building partnerships with your affiliates. Easily work with bloggers, influencers, ambassadors, or customers; we help you recruit, track, and pay affiliates and influencers through an intuitive, easy to use affiliate marketing platform.

Rep is the world’s first-ever AI-powered sales associate for e-commerce websites. It’s an AI that automatically identifies and approaches disengaged customers with a contextual and personalized conversation to upgrade customer experience, increase sales, and reduce customer support tickets.

Repeat is the easiest way for your customers to buy again. Your website doesn’t know what your customers want or when they want to reorder, but Repeat does. Brands like Olipop, Youth to the People, TRUFF, and Hydrant use Repeat to give their returning customers what their website can’t: the fastest way to reorder from a personalized selection of products at just the right time.

RetentionKit is an extension for WooCommerce that helps reduce subscription cancellations. Our extension helps to reduce subscription churn, increase customer LTV and improve your customer's experience. With RetentionKit you can... * Understand Why Customers Leave with Triggered Surveys - Poll your customers before they cancel to understand why they want to leave. Use this information to improve your store and reduce churn. * Allow Customers to Skip their Next Renewal Instead of Cancelling - Give customers the option to skip their next subscription period and allow them to automatically resume afterward. * Give Customers Renewal Discounts to Stay - Give customers discounts on their next subscription to keep them retained. Create different discounts per subscription product or product category. * Track Subscription Retention & Survey Responses - Your analytics dashboard show you total retention and churn statistics. View statistics per survey and see a log of all survey responses.

Returnly is a smart returns and payments platform that empowers consumers to easily return, exchange, and get the things they love when an order doesn’t work out. Eligible shoppers receive Instant Credit and Exchanges allowing them to get the right item before returning the wrong one with zero risk for you or your shoppers. Hundreds of companies like UNTUCKit, Thirdlove, and Outdoor Voices rely on Returnly to deliver a world-class return and exchange experience for their customers.

REVEAL by Omniconvert\nREVEAL by Omniconvert is a Customer Value Optimization platform that can help eCommerces understand, monitor and analyze their Customer Insights such as Customer Lifetime Value, Recency Frequency and Monetary Value (RFM) groups, Retention Rate, etc.

reviews.io Loved by thousands of e-commerce stores, Reviews.io is the most advanced review solution on the market. Instantly increase your on-site conversion rates by collecting and displaying customer feedback. Our content license with Google gets your reviews showing across the web, proven to increase trust in your business, traffic to your site and your bottom line.

Rise.ai is the gift card and store credit solution for eCommerce brands, designed to manage the entire re-engagement cycle with gift cards, loyalty cards, rewards, and refunds.


Rush Automated, State-Of-The-Art Shipment Tracking For Shopify eCommerce Businesses. The all-in-one post-purchase solution that turns one-time buyers into enthusiastic, life-long paying customers.

Salesforce Build more meaningful and lasting relationships and connect with your customers across sales, customer service, marketing, communities, apps, analytics, and more
Salesforce Commerce Cloud\nCommerce Cloud is the world's leading B2C and B2B commerce solution. Commerce Cloud is a multi-tenant, cloud-based commerce platform that empowers brands to create intelligent, unified buying experiences across all channels — mobile, social, web, and store.

SamCart is the first eCommerce platform built from the ground up for direct-to-consumer brands. By focusing at the product level and not the store level our customers can create beautiful sites that showcase their products, convert more visitors, and increase order value.
Saras Analytics is a full-fledged data management company that aids in growth by solving data challenges for e-commerce brands, aggregators, and agencies alike. Our solutions help customers leverage a 360-degree view of their business data with comprehensive reports and dashboards in a fully managed data warehouse. Daton: Daton is a no-code ETL cloud data pipeline built for analysts and developers to replicate data at scale and in real-time. Businesses can consolidate data from multiple, disparate data sources, using 100+ ready-to-use integrations. Daton-powered Solutions: By leveraging Daton-powered solutions, Amazon agencies, aggregators and e-commerce brands can get unified data from various sources, data insights and monitor their markets effortlessly. Data Team in a Box: Saras's Data Team-in-a-box is a team of full-stack data experts available at your organization’s disposal to help you focus on specific requirements. Your one-stop eCommerce data analytics and reporting solution provider.

Sauce has all the tools and integrations you need for Social Commerce, UGC procurement & activation, Social listening, Influencer Marketing and Tracking. * Each product in the platform is powerful alone, but the real magic happens when you use them together. Visual Shopping Bring your products to life by turning your photos and videos into shoppable experiences in your store. Beautifully, customizable galleries blend seamlessly with your brand. UGC Promote your brand via customers who already love it. Automatically activate, capture and tag the best post and videos from your most influential fans and put their content to work in your store. Influencer+ With Sauce's Reputation Index™, Branded Engagement and predictive Influencer analyses you'll take the guesswork out of your Influencer selections. Know the best influencers to choose for your brand and how much to pay them. Influencer Tracking Run your Influencer marketing campaigns on a tight shift with actionable insights. Automatical

Searchspring delivers the ultimate shopping experience. As the #1 search, merchandising, and personalization platform built exclusively for ecommerce, Searchspring enables brands to get the right product, to the right person, at the right time. With Searchspring, customers such as Chubbies, Pura Vida, Moen, Fabletics, Peet’s Coffee, SKIMS, West Elm, Specialized, Wildfang, and Ripcurl are increasing cart size, driving more conversions, and gaining repeat customers. Why Searchspring? Online shoppers hate visiting a site and not being able to find what they want. They won’t convert, they’ll jump to a competitor, and never come back. Searchspring gives you total control over your ecommerce site, so shoppers actually enjoy being there. Increase cart size, conversions, and repeat customers with search, merchandising, personalization, and insights that get the right product, in front of the right shopper, at the right time. That’s how you deliver the ultimate shopper experience.

Segment provides the customer data infrastructure that helps businesses put their customers first.

Segmentify If you’re looking for a personalisation solution to increase sales, boost customer engagement and provide better insights into your customers than other solutions then look no further. Imagine a tool that already knew your customer's preferences before they landed on your site, and was able to recommend the right products to the right customer at the right time. Segmentify creates a personalised shopping experience across every customer touchpoint in real-time, giving you the best advantage over your competition. Powered by machine-learning technology, Segmentify tracks and targets individual website visitors according to their unique online buying habits better than any personalisation platform on the market. Don’t take our word for it - Forbes mentioned us as one of the top machine learning companies to watch!

Segments by Tresl, Inc.\nSegments by Tresl is a self-guided data marketing platform that helps you build long-lasting customer relationships. LIFECYCLE JOURNEY Nurture customers across active, at-risk or churned. Optimize marketing ROI by targeting customers with the most potential. PRODUCT CROSS-SELLS & COMBOS Discover commonly purchased product combos for upsell and cross-sell opportunities.

Sendtric Easily create animated countdown timers on Sendtric to boost your clickthrough rates and increase sales. With Sendtric you can create countdown timers for your email campaigns with an intuitive interface that offers advanced customization for a variety of use cases such as retail sales, abandoned cart flows, event deadlines, and more.

Sesami, we believe it’s time to take commerce to the service industry. Use Sesami to run your service business, book and schedule appointments for services, events, and classes, and manage the whole customer journey. There are many touch points throughout a booking lifecycle. The better thought-out and harmonized they are, the more chances of having them for longer, and of course, the higher the revenue!

Sezzle is a payments company on a mission to financially empower the next generation. Sezzle’s payment platform increases the purchasing power for millions of consumers by offering 4 interest-free payments over 6 weeks at online stores and in-store locations. When consumers apply, approval is instant, and their credit scores are not impacted, unless the consumer elects to opt-in to a credit building feature, called Sezzle Up. This increase in purchasing power for consumers leads to increased sales and basket sizes for the more than 47,000 Active Merchants that offer Sezzle. As the only B Corp in fintech, Sezzle proves that all industries - even payments - can do their part to provide solutions and make a positive impact today and into the future.
ShipBob\nShipBob is a global fulfillment platform that supports over 7,000 ecommerce brands with a global network of 30+ fulfillment centers across the US, Canada, UK, EU, and Australia. We physically store our merchants’ goods, then pick, pack and ship them same-day as orders come in, according to their unique specifications. Our proprietary fulfillment platform allows brands to manage, edit, and customize orders, track real-time stock levels across any location, receive reorder notifications, and drive better omnichannel shopper experiences. ShipBob supports a host of custom features including: cross-border order fulfillment, carbon neutral shipping, B2B expansion, 100% coverage for 2-day delivery, and custom unboxing experiences.
ShippingChimp Inc\nShippingChimp is a post-purchase experience platform that tracks all your orders in real-time by integrating with your storefront and shipping carriers. Also, sends out emails/ SMS about order deliveries, from pickup to deliveries and delays. This reduces \where is my order?\" tickets drastically and increases customer experience."
ShipStation\nShipStation is the leading web-based shipping software that helps ecommerce retailers import, organize, process, and ship orders efficiently from any web browser (including iOS and Android mobile devices) no matter their size. With over 150 shopping carts, marketplaces, carriers, and fulfillment services, including Magento, Shopify, Shopify Plus, WooCommerce, BigCommerce, USPS, UPS, FedEx, DHL, and Canada Post (and so many more), you can streamline shipping wherever you sell and however you ship.
Shipup creates a branded, reassuring, and intuitive post-purchase experience. Shipup detects the key moments in the life of every package and allows online retailers to relay that information to their customers. Show your customers you care and turn one-time buyers into loyal shoppers while streamlining your customer support. Customer experience : - Send proactive branded notifications reassuring your customers at each touchpoint from order placed to delivery. - 70 different kinds of notifications - Offer better updates with a custom tracking page on your website - Drag & Drop tracking page editor Customer support : - Get real-time alerts for shipping incidents - Send satisfaction surveys right at delivery - Visualize tracking data directly in your CRM interface (Zendesk & Gorgias integration) Ops & Analytics - Build and share customized dashboards to dig into your shipping data. Answer key questions like \Which of my shipping carriers performed better during last peak season?\" - Generate one-time or regular CSV exports on your shipping operations. Use them for performance reporting or as a data feed for your operations. Integration : - 80+ carriers integrated (usps

Shoelace is an ads management platform with a team of over thirty Retargeting Experts that helps fast-growing brands such as Rhone, Boll & Branch, and 100% Pure create memorable and profitable Customer Journey Retargeting experiences.

Shogun is an ecommerce experience platform empowering brands to drive higher conversions, revenue, and brand loyalty. Their products Shogun Page Builder and Shogun Frontend help teams build and optimize their online stores to deliver exceptional experiences. Shogun enables merchants to exceed the limits of modern ecommerce with a unified frontend solution.

ShopFluency helps eCommerce and direct to consumer (DTC) brands solve an urgent and vital problem - How to identify, target, and find their best customers at a lower cost. Combined with our big brand experience and proven track record, our approach is different because we provide the tools and insights to leverage new data about your customers. This includes comparing your customer data to all 126 million U.S. households and ShopFluency’s customer profiles. Until now, these capabilities were often only accessible to big brands with big budgets and big staffs. By discovering and focusing on their top customer profiles, our clients feel less anxious and more confident. And it only takes about an hour of effort to set up.

Shopify isn't just an ecommerce software, Shopify is the best ecommerce platform that has everything you need to sell online, on social media, or in person.

Shopify Plus gives you a multi-channel platform with unmatched scalability so you can grow your business, instead of worrying about your website.

Shoplazza is a leading global eCommerce SaaS platform offering powerful tools for anyone to start, manage and scale their online store. We are your perfect eCommerce friend, brand partner, and business driver. No matter where you are, what you're selling, or what your business size is, you can always count on us to tech your business to the next level. You will find our platform powerful yet simple, cutting edge yet user-friendly.
Shopney

Shoporama is Scandinavian e-commerce software with a main focus on online marketing such as SEO, SEM and email marketing. Shoporama has it's eyes focused on one highly neglected feature: Speed. Shoporama delivers the worlds fastest hosted e-commerce stores.

Shopper Approved is a certified Google Reviews partner, and has collected over 57 million reviews for more than 26,000 online businesses. They collect up to 10x more reviews than any of their competitors by having a unique 2-step survey process, one at checkout and one as a follow-up email/text survey.

Skio powers subscriptions for some of the leading Shopify brands, including: SIMULATE, Muddy Bites, MatchaBar, and many others. We've raised $3.7M from investors like Y Combinator, MuteSix’s Daniel Rutberg and Moody Nashawaty, Shaan Puri, and Italic CEO Jeremy Cai. Skio's Features: * One-click checkout with Shop Pay, (increase conversion rates by 72%) * Passwordless login (reduce customer tickets by 25%) * 6x faster subscription editing (increase CX efficiency 20%) * Hosted subscription portal (get automatic features updates without needing additional theme work) * Easy Migration from ReCharge (no payment method updates needed, gradual rollout available, takes 1 day to 1 week)

Smartrr is the premium subscription app for DTC Shopify brands. Built with your end customer in mind, Smartrr increases brand engagement and LTV with a variety of out of the box subscription models, a beautifully branded member account experience, member-only benefits, and more. Join the likes of high-growth brands such as Starface, Remi, The Earthling, Stix, and Jolie whom have seen an average of 15X more sales over the lifetime of a subscriber. Smartrr’s dedicated account management team collaborates with you to capitalize on the recurring revenue potential of your business. Starting with a white-glove onboarding experience, the Smartrr team consults with you on the unique opportunities and challenges of your subscription business, developing a lasting relationship with an unparalleled commitment to your success.

smile.io Turn first-time customers into forever customers with the world’s most trusted loyalty app. Smile.io is the world’s largest loyalty platform, providing easy-to-use reward programs that help scaling ecommerce brands transform one-time sales into repeat, loyal customers. Over 100,000 brands with stores on Shopify, BigCommerce, and Wix use Smile points, referrals, and VIP programs to maximize their acquisition efforts and turn transactional purchases into passionate brand advocates that can’t help but come back again and again.

Social Snowball Thousands of brands use Social Snowball to manage their affiliate and influencer marketing programs. We help DTC brands turn their audience into their most efficient marketing channel through customer focused affiliate marketing. Our modern and automated affiliate programs drive millions in revenue for leading brands such as Fanjoy, Every Man Jack, Doe Lashes, Crossnet, and Zox.

Socital is an e-commerce marketing platform that addresses merchants' main pain points, such as lead generation, high cart abandonment rates, and increasing sales. * Easy-to-use popup editor. No coding required. * Wide range of pop-ups, promo bars, personalized product recommendations, success messages, scroll boxes, slide-ups, sidebars, and contact and survey forms. * Lead capture campaigns, exit-intent popups, cart abandonment popups, promotional onsite campaigns. * Over 300 ready-made templates. * Custom CSS configuration is available. * Responsive and optimized templates for all devices. * 30+ targeting rules to help target website visitors based on their behavior - first-time/returning visitors, visitors who abandoned their carts, specific keyword queries, specific URL queries, and more. * High-converting triggers such as timed-display triggers, exit-intent technology, behavioral triggers, and page scroll. * Email database analysis with proprietary algorithms to get First Name and Gender.

soona creates high-quality photo & video content to use across digital channels. you’re in the director’s chair. join your virtual shoot from anywhere. shop your content and buy your favorites. $39 photos & $93 video clips. always delivered fresh in 24 hours.

SoundCommerce is an end-to-end Retail Data Platform that accelerates business and data maturity so you can drive profitable growth, customer experience, and customer lifetime value across retail systems and channels. Built for retailers of any size or complexity, SoundCommerce transforms your unique data infrastructure into an easy-to-use, no-code environment that’s accessible to everyone — no engineering degree required. With SoundCommerce, retailers have confidence that every decision and dollar drive profitable growth from first click to doorstep delivery. Notable customers include FTD Proflowers, Bed, Bath & Beyond, Eddie Bauer, Bala, and Rainbow Shops. SoundCommerce is headquartered in Seattle.

Spoki Make your communication on WhatsApp more performing, engaging, effective, automatic and integrated with Spoki. Spoki is a platform that integrates the Official WhatsApp API. It is the ideal solution for: Marketing Include WhatsApp communication in your marketing strategy. Create sales funnels and integrate WhatsApp with Facebook, Instagram, Google advertising campaigns and much more. Notifications Send relevant information to your customers and make sure it is read at the right time. Send transactional notifications, appointment reminders, important updates. Sale Achieve all your sales goals. Use the channel with the highest open rate to send promotions, retrieve carts, up-sell and cross-select. Customer support Make your customer's shopping experience more immersive and engaging, provide targeted and timely information. The dedicated customer support team can guarantee excellent assistance.
Spree\nSpree Commerce is an open source E-commerce platform for Rails 6 with a mobile-first UX, an optional PWA frontend, REST API, GraphQL (soon), several official extensions and an ecosystem of 3rd party integrations.

Stamped Featuring the most robust Klaviyo integration on the market, let Stamped power your business with its market-leading Reviews & Ratings capabilities or its Loyalty & Referral platform. Stamped is an AI-powered eCommerce marketing platform that enables direct-to-consumer brands to accelerate business growth by enhancing user engagement, increasing revenue, and improving customer satisfaction through Reviews & Ratings, Q&A, Visual Marketing, Loyalty & Referrals. Our constant focus on customer success and seeking new innovative ways to help brands get more value out of our products and services have made us one of the fastest-growing companies in the industry.

Stitch All your data. Where you want it. In minutes. Stitch is a cloud-first, open source platform for rapidly moving data.
Stripe is a technology company that builds economic infrastructure for the internet. Businesses of every size—from new startups to public companies—use our software to accept payments and manage their businesses online.

Stripo is an all-in-one platform for creating email templates. The drag-and-drop (WYSIWYG) and HTML email template builders allow users to create high-quality interactive and responsive emails., such as AMP-powered emails. Uniq email automation tools for creating perfect design faster than ever before, email testing tool. Create any templates in a minute and collaborate with your team.

Sufio is a professional invoicing solution that automatically creates and sends invoices for your Shopify store orders. Just select one of the brand-focused invoice templates and rest easy knowing your documents meet worldwide B2C and B2B sales compliance. Sufio also allows you to create custom workflows according to your unique business needs, giving you space to automate every part of the invoicing process and leaving you with more time to focus on growing a successful business.

Sumo is the most powerful tool to grow your email list, increase conversions, and generate more sales for eCommerce stores. More than 37,000 eCommerce sites use Sumo to convert more purchases and delight their customers.

Supermetrics solves data problems by streamlining data delivery to your chosen reporting tool. You can have back the ownership of your data and turn it into an opportunity. Over 700 000 marketers move their data through Supermetrics. Supermetrics is the #1 data pipeline company, and 15% of global ad spend is reported through Supermetrics.

Survicate is a survey and NPS tool that has a native and free integration with Klaviyo. Just like Klaviyo, Survicate is easy to use. You can make surveys in minutes with a visual drag & drop builder. Survicate has an intuitive, zero-learning-curve interface. Most popular use cases of the Survicate and Klaviyo integration: * Measure NPS and CSAT to gauge customer loyalty and customer satisfaction * Conduct market research, including customer profiling and segmentation * Run cart-abandonment surveys to increase conversion rates What customers say: \Klaviyo and Survicate are a match made in loyalty marketing heaven. Easy

Swapt exists to solve what we call “the black-hole problem” — where the vast majority of foot traffic at in-person venues (stores, sporting events, concerts, etc.) is simply unknown. We’re on a mission to flip these anonymous “customers” into known customers, unlocking an unprecedented opportunity for marketers and brand owners.

Sweet Analytics is the perfect platform for bringing your data to life and helping your business grow by converting “so what?” into “do what?” With self serve integrations, Sweet has the ability to deliver insights within hours; saving you time with reporting and helping you deliver an improved ROI on marketing spend. With a focus on offline, as well as online marketing channels, the Sweet single customer view (SCV) combines multiple metrics to provide clarity on the customers' journey; allowing you to identify your most profitable channels and to acquire and retain customers with maximum efficiency. And with customers increasingly swapping from websites to marketplaces, we combine Amazon and other marketplace data into SCV to provide key cross channel shopping insights; no longer leaving you blind on cross shopping behaviour. Supported by a team of experts - and a 28 day free trial - to help you get going; Sweet will help you translate your aspirations to grow into numbers and actions.
Swell Rewards\nSwell Rewards, a Yotpo company, is an incentive marketing platform whose highly customizable software has helped thousands of merchants build beautifully on-brand rewards and referral programs.

Swym powers a cross-channel shopping platform for retailers, built to intuitively address the needs of today’s consumer, and can be easily integrated into an existing e-commerce site. Retailers can leverage the Swym platform to maximize the value of each customer interaction by enabling seamless multi-screen shopping experiences for shoppers.
Systema AI\nOur Mission Our mission is to deliver transformative and human ecommerce experiences that are intuitive and always relevant, by anticipating and responding to your customers' needs in real-time. Why Systema? Unlike traditional personalisation solutions that look backwards at cookies, we have developed an innovative AI-first approach that uses anonymous interaction data to anticipate an anonymous shopper's or loyal customer's next step. Our personalisation solutions enhance the customer experience by using real-time product recommendations, dynamic content and EDM, and smart and visual search to deliver improved conversions.

Syte empowers shoppers to instantly find items they’ll love with inspiring, visual product discovery journeys that drive conversion. As the world’s first Product Discovery Platform, we use visual AI to create intuitive search and discovery experiences for all types of shoppers. Our solutions include visual search, automated product tagging, personalized recommendations, email recommendations, shoppable social curation, and more. Fashion, jewelry, and home decor brands and retailers like Farfetch, Prada, SHEIN, H. Samuel, Coleman Furniture, and Baycrew’s, partner with Syte to boost revenue and drive business growth.

Tada offers gamifed pop-ups which can easily be added to your store to increase your subscribers and decrease cart abandonment. Let your visitors play a fun, engaging game to win a discount in exchange for their email address. With our email validation feature, you only spend time and money on quality contacts. Our great user interface helps you add fully customisable pop-up to your store easily and and our support team always ready to help!
Tadpull\nWe help clients grow traffic, convert onsite users to customers, and retain those customers to increase lifetime value. Using our proprietary Pond software we unify and simplify data, and then deploy strategic services to amplify performance by getting the right product to the right person at the right time, increasing revenue for our clients on average +30% YoY. Our team is equal parts data science, digital marketing and software engineering. We use these talents to run data-driven campaigns across SEO, Paid, Email/SMS, and Social. Once users are onsite, we work to boost conversion rates and capture voice of the customer with our proprietary software platform for running eCommerce businesses across all these datasets. We've been fortunate to work serve some of the world's most respected brands in the online endeavors including Jackson Hole Resort, Caterpillar, MYSTERY RANCH, Outdoor Research, Meat Eater and a host of others.
Taggshop enables brands to create and publish shoppable UGC galleries, review feeds, visual UGC galleries, visual marketing experiences, and content-driven ecommerce shopping experiences. With Taggshop, brands can collect content from social media platforms be it branded content or user-generated content. Tag products to make this social content shoppable, and publish these shoppable galleries on eCommerce website or online brand store. The tool helps brands to turn content into conversions, drive inspiration into sales, and deliver a unique shopping experience through content. Brands can collect content from over 10 social platforms, tag unlimited products, get UGC rights, customize the galleries, and publish shoppable galleries on different ecommerce platforms like Shopify, Magento, BigCommerce, WordPress and more.

Tapcart is the premier mobile app provider for over 7,000 of the world’s fastest-growing Shopify brands including Fashion Nova, Urban Planet, Chubbies, and more. With Tapcart, you can design and launch a world-class mobile app that increases conversion and engagement with no coding or development work required.

Teamwork Commerce is a cloud-based, mobile retail technology solution focused on creating a platform that is tailored to the retailer’s needs. Teamwork is constantly evolving to bring retail to the customer. Our customizable suite of retail apps is truly limitless, combining our mobile point-of-sale, OMS, and many integrations. Top retailers in the world use Teamwork Commerce to create a total omnichannel experience, boost sales, and achieve frictionless commerce.

Teeinblue is built to support merchants worldwide in offering highly converted PERSONALIZED PRODUCTS with real-time previews and automating the product personalization business. Free Install on Shopify! Powerful Personalization Options * Upload Photo * Custom Text * Clipart Personalization * Custom Maps Add Print-On-Demand Products We’ve integrated with the most qualified providers around the world (API connection: Picanova, Dreamship, Customcat, ShineOn, Printful). You can easily view, import their product catalog to create personalizable products right in Teeinblue. Besides, you can freely add your own products & create campaigns to launch on the storefront with no limitation. Order Process Control Using our smart Order Dashboard you are able to keep track of your daily orders more easily and controllably. Orders from integrated providers can be sent directly from Teeinblue through API connection. Or, you can fulfill orders easily by exporting them to CSV which also include the final print file URL


Thanx We help restaurants, retailers and malls grow customer lifetime value through data-driven engagement and modern digital experiences.

Tiendanube We are the leading e-commerce platform in Latin America, which empowers and motivates 90k+ entrepreneurs to show the world what they are capable of on our Nuvemshop and Tiendanube platforms Parent brand, Nuvemshop, has been in the market for 10 years, and we are considered one of the 5 most valuable companies in Latin America We have a team of more than 600 experts who work together in Brazil, Argentina and Mexico to enable all entrepreneurs to go further and further in their business in an increasingly digital economy

radeswell helps small DTC brands and multichannel category leaders turn data into opportunities to experiment. We replace spreadsheets with automated intelligence that tells ecommerce teams at-a-glance where their attention is needed in their business today — so they can make more strategic decisions, faster.

Trengo Create conversations that make customers come back This next-generation inbox will unlock fantastic customer experiences. With the right support at the right time on the right channel, customers will remember your business. For all the right things. More conversations. Less effort Automate repetitive tasks, reply to FAQs with quick or auto-replies and set up rules. Many things can be complex, but customer engagement doesn’t have to be. Automation will save time and money, without compromising on quality.

Triple Whale is the central source of truth for your ecommerce store. With Triple Whale, you can view real-time marketing performance data through a customizable dashboard or mobile app, integrate all of your core channels (paid social, email, SMS, + more), and gain clarity into every customer purchase. Best in class data attribution + data visualization = confident scaling for better ROAS.

Trustpilot is an open-to-all customer reviews platform with business tools that make it easy to get more reviews, promote your best feedback, engage with customers, and analyze the results. Turn reviews into traffic, sales, and customer loyalty with Trustpilot. Every month, people share over 2.6 million reviews on Trustpilot to help each other find great companies and make better buying decisions. More than just a rating, Trustpilot stars signify to the world that people love your company and you love them right back. Join the conversation and stand out as a brand people love.

TrustSpot Build trust with your customers and drive more sales through authentic customer reviews. Capture ratings & reviews, video testimonials, photos, social experiences, product Q&A, and more.

Typeform The future of online forms. Power your brand’s interactions with beautifully designed, professional-looking forms that people just love.

nUnbounce is the landing page builder designed for marketers. Build high-converting landing pages and popups for your campaigns, without the need for developers.

Uncapped Founded in 2019, Uncapped is Europe’s first revenue-based finance provider, which allows founders to raise growth capital without giving up control of their business. The company was born out of frustration with the limited financing options available for European entrepreneurs. Uncapped provides business advances of between $10k and $5m with 0% interest and no hidden charges, allowing founders to access fair and flexible finance. It makes money by charging a low flat fee which is paid back from future sales revenue. Move fast Apply in minutes, get a decision in 24 hours Keep control No personal guarantees or loss of equity Stay flexible If revenues slow, so do repayments Worry free Know the full cost upfront. Pay only a flat fee as low as 2% Businesses with a minimum of 5-6 months trading and $10k in monthly revenues are eligible.
Union Works was founded in 2016 by 3 Shopify experts. We combine our development and eCommerce experience to deliver smart and robust apps and integrations to the Shopify platform. Our sole focus is to enable Merchants to grow with Shopify through smart, innovative apps and integrations.

Unstack You're already using Klaviyo to create more personal customer experiences with your email and SMS campaigns. Now you can bring that same level of personalization into the on-site experience with Unstack. Unstack is deeply integrated with Shopify and Klaviyo, empowering marketing teams and agencies to quickly create dedicated shoppable landing pages for every touchpoint in the customer journey. Take your pages even further by setting up rules that determine which content to show users based on their actions and data. For example, if someone has viewed a product multiple times but hasn't added to cart, you can set a rule to show a specific offer that nudges them to purchase, or remind them about your shipping and return policies. How to start using this integration in minutes: 1. Install Untack in the Shopify store (2 minutes) 2. Enable the Klaviyo integration in Unstack (2 minutes) 3. Grab a pre-built landing page template (5 minutes) 4. Set your personalization rules (5 minutes)

Upfluence is an all-in-one influencer marketing platform that allows you to build & manage all aspects of your influencer marketing campaigns in one place. - Influencer Discovery Identify influencers who are visiting your website and purchasing your products and turn them into your brand ambassadors. Capture their social data with our Live Capture tool and analyse their performance metrics to pick the right influencers for your campaigns. Watch your influencer network grow passively, or expand your network with our database of over 3 million influencers. - Influencer Outreach & Campaign Management Contact influencers at scale with personalized bulk emailing and centralize all your communications with our Gmail and Outlook integrations. Build detailed campaign briefs, manage your negotiations with influencers, keep track of your budget and monitor your campaign status. - Influencer Relationship Management Keep track of your influencer roster in our Influencer Relationship Management (IRM) dashboard. Build new influencer lists, add influencers to campaigns, and rate their profiles to easily find your favorites. - Analytics Measure your campaign results and review your influencer's individual performance. Integrate your third-party affiliate tool to keep track of sales and measure your ROI. Get more out of influencer marketing with Upfluence.

Upscribe allows you to easily deliver a powerful customer subscription experience that drives brand loyalty and keeps customers coming back.

Vajro is a mobile application development platform (MADP) that helps e-commerce stores to build visually appealing mobile apps that provide a great shopping experience to their customers. With Vajro’s intuitive drag & drop builder, 200+ built-in features, and 70+ technology integrations, anyone can build high-converting mobile apps with no coding experience. Our customer portfolio includes 2500+ e-commerce brands from a wide variety of segments, including retail, boutique, and grocery stores. Our mission: empowering brands to drive hyper-growth by delivering stellar digital buying experiences.

VideoPeel enables businesses to capture authentic video reviews and video testimonials to optimize conversions and boost sales in your eCommerce store, ads, and other channels.
Viral Loops is a template-based referral marketing solution for modern marketers and creators. Referral program templates inspired by companies like The Morning Brew help publications turn readers into ambassadors and get more subscribers through word-of-mouth.
ViralSweep\nGrow your email list, increase your social following, and engage your customers with exciting sweepstakes, contests, instant win games, hashtag promotions, referral campaigns and much more!

Volusion is a one-stop e-commerce platform to help you build your store and curate an audience.

Weglot is a simple, fast translation solution that both translates and displays the content of your website into more than 100 languages - without the need for code. Install Weglot in just 10 minutes and have a fully multilingual website up and running immediately. Easily translate and manage your multilingual website through Weglot’s simple interface. Weglot works by detecting and automatically translating all your website content which you can then easily fine-tune yourself, or collaborate with pro-translators through the Weglot dashboard. With useful features such as an ‘in context editor’ - you can edit your translations within the website structure and design, and easily see what your translated pages look like. And, Weglot is SEO multilingual ready. Translated URLs, additional hreflang tags and translated metadata ensure you’re searchable within your new markets.

WeSupply helps companies transform customer experience for the better by reducing client friction and WISMO calls with automation, a data-driven approach, and best-in-­­class self-service return solutions. The flexibility of WeSupply's post-purchase integration capabilities, has made it a popular choice for online marketplaces. WeSupply is compatible with a variety of third-party tools and platforms, including Adobe Commerce (Magento), Shopify, Aptos, and Netsuite, and others. List of Services: 1. Order Tracking 2. Estimate Delivery Date EDD 3. Branded Tracking Page 4. Delivery Notifications 5. Returns RMA

Whatagraphaggregates all of your marketing analytics in one place. Track campaign results across different channels, build customizable visual reports and dashboards.

Wheelio is the ultimate gamified opt-in tool to generate email leads or SMS leads or even Messenger leads. We use gamification to make the lead interaction entertaining and a more joyful experience for the users. We have multiple gamification options, such as the famous Wheelio (Wheel of fortune), Rollie (Slot machine) and Scratchy (Scratch Card). Leading the market in advanced triggering and gamification in general.

Wicked Reports Better data buys better customers. Crush your competition with data insights you cannot get from any marketing attribution platform but Wicked Reports! The 3 advantages Wicked customers have over businesses that depend only on the platform Ad Managers are: 1. Measure iOS Opt-Out User Conversions: Your competition will be flying blind, still relying on the bad data in Ad Manager, while you are using Wicked Reports and tracking very single user action (even if they opt-out of tracking on iOS). 2. Measure Conversions For Longer Attribution Windows: Facebook now restricts attribution to conversions that happen within only 7 days, while Wicked reports 30 days out. Better yet, you can track every sale back to first click or lead opt-in... even if it happens months or years later. 3. Optimize Based On Actual Customer Value: The Wicked Dashboard gives you the power to direct advertising spend and efforts towards content that converts based on LTV, ROI or customized conversions.

WisePops helps you create engaging popups that convert in just a few clicks. WisePops in short: • A state-of-the-art drag and drop popup builder • 30+ targeting options including UTMs, cart value and 6 different pop-up triggers • Advanced reporting, revenue attribution, and A/B testing options • Fair pricing

Wix is a leading eCommerce platform that lets you sell everywhere while managing everything from one place. To date, Wix eCommerce has powered the eCommerce capabilities of millions of sites. Build a state-of-the-art online store and sell in person, across mobile, social media, and online marketplaces.

Wonderment For eCommerce brands, transparency is your strongest weapon in customer experience and retention. Wonderment is not just any order tracking app - we give you full visibility into your shipments so you can deliver a delightfully unexpected post-purchase experience. Proactively notify customers about the status of their order, including delayed or lost shipments. Improve customer satisfaction while reducing support costs. Wonderment offers unlimited order tracking for most Shopify plans.

WooCommerce is the e-commerce platform built for WordPress so you can build your store, your way.

Wufoo Build custom online forms that you can use to collect data, payments and to automate your workflows.

Yaguara is a connected operations platform that allows you to integrate your tools and house all your data in one place. Yaguara’s visualizations help you make sense of how you’re performing and get an understanding of what actions are creating which results. Our OKR functionality combined with your data allows you and your team to set and measure objectives using real-time data. Yaguara makes your data actionable without any code.

Yieldify is a website personalization engine that helps e-commerce businesses across the globe, such as Adidas, L'oreal, Estee Lauder, Avis and Flight Centre to drive increased revenue from every website engagement. By combining our end-to-end service and proprietary technology with deep industry expertise you can maximize the performance of every online engagement.

Yotpo helps thousands of brands like Rebecca Minkoff, MVMT, Bob’s Discount Furniture, and Steve Madden accelerate direct-to-consumer growth. Yotpo’s single-platform approach integrates reviews, loyalty, and more. Brands with Yotpo are empowered to create smarter, higher-converting experiences that spark and sustain customer relationships. Yotpo is a Forbes Cloud 100 company with offices in New York, London, Boston, and Tel Aviv.

Zapier is an online automation tool that connects your favorite apps together. By setting up connections called Zaps, you can automate your day-to-day tasks, and build workflows between apps that otherwise wouldn’t be possible.
Zeenk provides customer-centric data analytics that empowers DTC brands and e-commerce sellers to measure and forecast the performance of their customers and optimize their acquisition and retention channels. Using API integrations, Zeenk extracts data from sales and marketing platforms like Shopify, Klayvio, Meta, Google, TikTok, etc. and centralizes DTCs’ metrics and campaign reports in easy-to-use, customizable dashboards. Even more unique, Zeenk's customer-level analytics, powered by proprietary data science models paired with causal modeling technology, can accurately track and predict individual customer performance and profitability. Our advanced customer analytics capabilities include: customer lifetime value (CLV) analysis and prediction, customer acquisition cost (CAC) analysis, churn probability and prediction, customer-level CLV:CAC ratios and CLV versus churn probability analysis. Zeenk also helps brands leverage these insights in their marketing channels. For example, Zeenk can create segments of customers with higher projected CLV for retention campaigns or for audience modeling. Or set up CLV in the brand’s ad channels, like Meta, to use as an optimization signal for ad campaigns.

Zembula puts the power of your data back in your hands. Create dynamic and personalized email and SMS content that updates at the moment of each and every open. It's easy to use and built with the marketer in mind.

Zendesk The best customer experiences are built with Zendesk Our customer service and engagement products are powerful and flexible, and scale to meet the needs of any business.

Zinrelo is a modern-day, loyalty rewards platform that maximizes repeat sales and per-customer revenue through 360-degree customer engagement, data sciences and machine learning. Zinrelo unlocks customer loyalty across multiple dimensions including transactional, social, referral, engagement, behavioral and emotional loyalty. Zinrelo customers see an 80% increase in repeat sales, a 50% improvement in profitability and 2.4X per-customer revenue. Zinrelo is seamlessly integrated with the Klaviyo platform. It enables businesses to easily launch a highly customized rewards program. Zinrelo believes that data is the key to a successful rewards program. We use data in a way no other loyalty company does. Zinrelo has been rated as the #1 loyalty rewards software by G2 Crowd. Key Differentiators of the Loyalty Rewards Platform by Zinrelo: 1. Data Sciences Approach - Our data sciences team analyzes past purchase data to deliver a perfect fit rewards program optimized for your business. 2. Machine Learning for User Segmentation and Targeting - Machine learning techniques are used to segment loyalty members into actionable clusters. - Targeted loyalty campaigns such as tier upgrades, bonus points, double points, and other point’s incentives can be run against actionable segments to derive revenue. 3. White Glove Service - Our white glove service handholds our Clients through the launch process. - Quarterly Business Reviews are conducted to analyze performance and review success plans. - Clients love Zinrelo’s support. Zinrelo has 5-star reviews on all major review sites. 4. Blazing-fast Enterprise Grade Platform - Zinrelo is the fastest platform out there. It caters to thousands of businesses and serves over 100 million loyalty members. Features Zinrelo loyalty rewards platform is loaded with features that are needed by mid to large businesses. - 360 Degree Customer Engagement - Built-in Referral Program - Reward Tiers - Powerful Marketing Promotions Engine - Fully Customizable & Fully Brandable Member Dashboard - Omni-Channel Program Implementation - Flexible Rewards - Automated Email Notifications - Detailed Reports with Downloads - 100 Currencies Supported Including USD, EUR - Multi-language Support within a Single Loyalty Program

Zoho Unique and powerful suite of software to run your entire business, brought to you by a company with the long term vision to transform the way you work.


!

